year	title	include	journal	abstract	databaseid	authors	database1995	The cyclic depsipeptide backbone of the didemnins	0	Acta Crystallographica - Section C - Crystal Structure Communications	"An X-ray crystal analysis of phi-lactone N-?1-?N-?4-?[3- hydroxy-5-methyl-1-oxo-4-(N-L-threonylamino)heptyl]- oxy?-2,5-dimethyl-1,3-dioxohexyl?-L-leucyl?-L-prolyl?- N,O-dimethyl-L-tyrosine hydrobromide hydrate (1a), C42H66N5O11+.Br-.H2O, was obtained in order to determine the backbone folding of the macrocycle and to compare the results obtained with those reported previously for the natural product didemnin B (1b). Some differences were noted in the torsion angles of the two conformers of the hydrobromide salt, denoted (1a) and (1a'). The conformation of (1a') resembled the conformation of (1b) more closely than did that of (1a). Certain regions of both crystal backbones were more flexible than those in didemnin B; however, the transannular hydrogen bonds in both (1a) and (1a') were somewhat stronger than in (1b)."	8527098	"S. C. Mayer, P. J. Carroll and M. M. Joullie"	MEDLINE2004	"Histone deacetylase inhibitor, FK228, induces apoptosis and suppresses cell proliferation of human glioblastoma cells in vitro and in vivo"	0	Acta Neuropathologica	"We investigated the effects of FK228 on cell proliferation and apoptosis against human glioblastoma (GM) T98G, U251MG, and U87MG cells. Upon exposure to FK228, cell proliferation was inhibited, and apoptosis detected by the cleavage of CPP32 was induced. FK228 increased the expression levels of p21 (WAF-1) and of pro-apoptotic Bad protein in all GM cells. Furthermore, FK228 treatment also reduced the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-xL in all GM cells and anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 in U87MG cells, thereby shifting the cellular equilibrium from life to death. An increased accumulation of histone H4 was detected in the p21 (WAF-1) promoter and the structural gene (exon 2) and the Bad structural gene (exon 2 and 3) upon treatment with FK228, as assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay. Thus, the results indicated that an increased expression of p21 (WAF1) and Bad due to FK228 is regulated, at least in part, by the degree of acetylation of the gene-associated histone. We also found that FK228 inhibits cellular invasiveness and decreases MMP-2 activity. In addition, the growth of transplanted human GM m-3 cells into the subcutaneous tissue of hereditary athymic mice was significantly inhibited, and apoptosis was induced with FK228 treatment. The results suggested that FK228 might be useful in the treatment of human GM, although further studies will be needed."	15024582	"H. Sawa, H. Murakami, M. Kumagai, M. Nakasato, S. Yamauchi, N. Matsuyama, Y. Tamura, A. Satone, W. Ide, I. Hashimoto and H. Kamada"	MEDLINE2007	Longer wavelength fluorescence resonance energy transfer depsipeptide substrates for hepatitis C virus NS3 protease	0	Analytical Biochemistry	"Maturation of the hepatitis C virus (HCV) polyprotein occurs by a series of proteolytic processes catalyzed by host cell proteases and the virally encoded proteases NS2 and NS3. Although several peptidomimetic inhibitors of NS3 protease have been published, only a few small molecule inhibitors have been reported. In an effort to improve screening efficiency by minimizing the spectral interference of various test compounds, a substrate that contains the longer wavelength fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) pair, TAMRA/QSY-7, was devised. For the optimized substrate T-Abu-Q, with sequence Ac-Asp-Glu-Lys(TAMRA)-Glu-Glu-Abu-Psi(COO)Ala-Ser-Lys(QSY-7)-amide, the kinetic parameters with HCV NS3 protease are K(m)=30 microM, k(cat)=0.6s(-1), and k(cat)/K(m)=20,100s(-1)M(-1). We show that this substrate is suitable for inhibitor analysis and mechanistic studies so long as the substrate concentration is low enough (0.5 microM) to avoid complications from high inner filter effects. The substrate is especially useful with ultra-high-density screening formats, such as microarrayed compound screening technology, because there is less spectral interference from the compounds being tested than with more traditional (EDANS/DABCYL) FRET protease substrates. The merits of the new substrate, as well as potential applications of this FRET pair to other protease substrates, are discussed."	17644059	"A. K. Konstantinidis, P. L. Richardson, K. A. Kurtz, R. Tripathi, C.-M. Chen, P. Huang, J. Randolph, D. Towne, J. Donnelly, U. Warrior, T. Middleton and W. M. Kati"	MEDLINE2006	Phase I study of Aplidine in a dailyx5 one-hour infusion every 3 weeks in patients with solid tumors refractory to standard therapy. A National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group study: NCIC CTG IND 115	0	Annals of Oncology	"BACKGROUND: Aplidine is a cyclic depsipeptide isolated from the marine tunicate Aplidium albicans. METHODS: This phase I study of Aplidine given as a 1-hour i.v. infusion daily for 5 days every 3 weeks was conducted in patients with refractory solid tumors. Objectives were to define the dose limiting toxicities, the maximal tolerated dose, and the recommended phase II dose. RESULTS: Thirty-seven patients were accrued on study. Doses ranged from 80 microg/m(2) to 1500 microg/m(2)/day. Eleven patients received more than three cycles of Aplidine. Dose-limiting toxicities occurred at 1500 microg/m(2) and 1350 microg/m(2)/day and consisted of nausea, vomiting, myalgia, fatigue, skin rash and diarrhea. Mild to moderate muscular pain and weakness was noted in patients treated with multiple cycles with no significant drug related neurotoxicity. Bone marrow toxicity was not observed. The recommended dose for phase II studies was 1200 microg/m(2) daily for 5 days, every 3 weeks. Pharmacokinetic studies performed during the first cycle demonstrated that therapeutic plasma levels of Aplidine are reachable well below the recommended dose. Nine patients with progressive disease at study entry had stable disease and two had minor responses, one in non-small cell lung cancer and one in colorectal cancer. CONCLUSIONS: Aplidine given at a dose of 1200 microg/m(2) daily for 5 days, every 3 weeks is well tolerated with few severe adverse events. This schedule of Aplidine is under evaluation in phase II studies in hematological malignancies and solid tumors."	16966366	"J. A. Maroun, K. Belanger, L. Seymour, S. Matthews, J. Roach, J. Dionne, D. Soulieres, D. Stewart, R. Goel, D. Charpentier, G. Goss, E. Tomiak, J. Yau, J. Jimeno, G. Chiritescu and G. National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials"	MEDLINE1996	Vancomycin-resistant enterococci	0	Annals of Pharmacotherapy	"OBJECTIVE: To review vancomycin resistance in enterococci (Enterococcus faecalis and Enterococcus faecium) with respect to history, epidemiology, mechanism of resistance, and management. DATA SOURCES: A MEDLINE, IDIS, and current journal search of English-language articles on vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) published between 1982 and 1994 was conducted. STUDY SELECTION: Studies and reports pertaining to vancomycin-resistant E. faecalis and E. faecium were evaluated. Case reports, cohort, epidemiologic, in vitro and in vivo studies were evaluated. DATA EXTRACTION: Reports in which vancomycin minimum inhibitory concentrations were 32 micrograms/mL or more were evaluated. DATA SYNTHESIS: Large outbreaks of VRE infection have occurred as a result of nosocomial spread. Such outbreaks have required intensive infection control procedures to limit the spread of VRE. Vancomycin resistance in E. faecalis and E. faecium has been subdivided into phenotypes, VanA and VanB. The mechanism of vancomycin resistance is caused by the production of depsipeptide D-Ala-D-Lac, which replaces D-Ala-D-Ala in the peptidoglycan pathway, thereby preventing the binding of vancomycin to D-Ala-D-Ala in the peptidoglycan cell wall. The vanA gene is associated with a transpositional element (Tn1546) that can be transferred via conjugation while most data suggest that vanB has an endogenous origin. Education, aggressive infection control practices. surveillance programs, and appropriate use of vancomycin are necessary to respond to the VRE problem. CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of VRE has increased significantly in recent years and has become a worldwide problem. Several factors, such as prior exposure to vancomycin and antibotics (e.g., cephalosporins, antianaerobic agents), physical location in the hospital, immunosuppression, prolonged hospital stay, and VRE gastrointestinal colonization are associated with VRE infection and colonization. Antibiotic treatment of serious VRE infection depends on the phenotype. Optimal treatment of the VanA phenotype is unknown; the VanB phenotype may be treated with teicoplanin and an aminoglycoside. [References: 82]"	8792949	A. S. Gin and G. G. Zhanel	MEDLINE2005	"New drugs in cancer therapy, National Tumor Institute, Naples, 17-18 June 2004"	0	Anti-Cancer Drugs	"An international meeting on 'New Drugs in Cancer Therapy' was held at the National Tumor Institute of Naples, on 17-18 June 2004. The first session of the meeting focused on analogs of conventional anti-cancer drugs, such as taxanes, platinum compounds, anthracyclines and topoisomerase I inhibitors. The data of a phase II trial of BMS-247550, an epothilone B analog, in patients with renal cell carcinoma were reported. Data were also presented on BBR-3464, a trinucleate platinum analog which was developed on the grounds of greater potency, a more rapid rate of DNA binding and the ability to induce apoptosis regardless of the p53 status of the cell. Pegylated-coated liposomal formulation doxorubicin (Caelyx) has shown efficacy in metastatic breast cancer and in advanced ovarian cancer; sabarubicin is a third-generation anthracycline with equal or superior potency to doxorubicin or idarubicin in a variety of human tumor cell lines of different histotypes. The main mechanisms of resistance to topoisomerase I inhibitors were discussed; data on diflomotecan were reported, showing a narrow therapeutic index of the drug. The second session of the meeting focused on the ErbB family as a target for anti-cancer therapy. Recent evidence of a correlation between epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations at exons 18-21 and clinical response of advanced non-small cell lung cancer to gefitinib therapy was commented on. The issue of the association between ErbB2 expression and gefitinib activity was addressed, while clinical data of a phase II study of gefitinib in advanced breast cancer were presented. Monoclonal antibodies targeting EGFR represent another worthwhile way to interfere with EGFR-driven signal transduction. Cetuximab is reaching market registration in advanced colorectal cancer; in particular, due to the results of the BOND study. The recently presented results of the Bonner study strongly support the activity of this drug in head and neck cancer. A step forward in the research on anti-EGFR monoclonal antibodies may be represented by humanized monoclonal antibodies, such as EMD 72000 and ABX-EGF. Imatinib mesylate is probably the most outstanding example of an effective targeted therapy--its activity in gastrointestinal stromal tumors was so exciting that the drug reached the market without undergoing phase III evaluation. The third session of the meeting was on angiogenesis inhibitors. Drugs may interfere with the angiogenic process via different mechanisms and there is a sound rationale for combining anti-angiogenic agents with chemotherapy or multiple anti-angiogenic strategies. Clinical results obtained with direct anti-angiogenic agents have been negative up to now, but some exciting results have been seen with bevacizumab, a monoclonal antibody targeting vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). A few VEGF-tyrosine kinase inhibiting small molecules, such as ZD6474, AZD2171 and PTK/ZK, are undergoing clinical trials. The fourth session of the meeting was on interference with intracellular signal transduction. Farnesyl transferase inhibitors exert their action by interfering with either pro-Ras or RhoB farnesylation. Several clinical studies of different phases with compounds belonging to this class have been carried out, either alone or in combination with chemotherapy; unfortunately, all of them have turned out to be negative. Cell cycle inhibitors, such as CYC-202 and BMS-387032, represent a class of interesting compounds which are in the early phase of development and whose clinical results are eagerly awaited. Another strategy to achieve cell cycle inhibition is to target heat shock protein 90, a molecular chaperone required for protein folding. Clinical data on depsipeptide, a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor with activity in T cell lymphoma, were presented. Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid is another small molecular weight inhibitor of HDAC activity. Phase I/II clinical trials have shown low toxicity and evidence of anti-tumor activity; on the other hand, this compound has potential for synergi"	15655420	"F. Caponigro, M. Basile, V. de Rosa and N. Normanno"	MEDLINE2000	FR901228 causes mitotic arrest but does not alter microtubule polymerization	0	Anti-Cancer Drugs	"FR901228, a natural cyclic depsipeptide, shows high cytotoxicity against human cancer cell lines (low nM IC50 values). Cells exposed to FR901228 arrest with G1 or G2/M DNA content; S phase is depleted. G2/M cells include cells arrested in mitosis. We wished to understand the mitotic arrest by this compound. Mitotic arrest is often due to interference with microtubules and COMPARE testing in the NCI drug screen indicated a possible taxane-like mechanism. Testing of FR901228 for tubulin binding or alteration of in vitro MT assembly failed to reveal any effect. Likewise, examination of cellular microtubules following exposure to FR901228 did not reveal any change. Similar G2/M accumulation was observed in MCF7, MCF10 and PC3 cells. About 50% of G2/M cells were mitotic and contained microtubule spindles. Mitotic cells peaked at about 14-16 h drug exposure and declined to near 0% by 24-30 h. The block was at prometaphase, with numerous chromosomes unattached to the spindle. We conclude that FR901228 induces formation of aberrant spindles probably by interfering with chromosome attachment, causing mitotic accumulation without affecting mitotic microtubules."	11001385	"V. Sandor, A. R. Robbins, R. Robey, T. Myers, E. Sausville, S. E. Bates and D. L. Sackett"	MEDLINE2001	Marine pharmacology in 1999: antitumor and cytotoxic compounds	0	Anticancer Research	"During 1999 marine antitumor pharmacology research involved researchers in Austria, Australia, England, France, Germany, Greece, Holland, Italy, Japan, Spain, Taiwan and the United States. Thirty six papers were published in peer-reviewed journals describing the antitumor and cytotoxic properties of 30 marine natural products belonging to four structural types, namely polyketides, terpenes, nitrogen-containing compounds and polysaccharides. The organisms yielding these bioactive marine compounds comprised a diverse group of marine animals, algae, fungi and bacteria. A variety of antitumor pharmacological studies were conducted with 17 marine natural products with established mechanisms of action in a number of experimental and clinical models. Didemnin B, a tunicate-derived depsipeptide with potent antitumor effects, completed a Phase II anticancer clinical trial which resulted indeterminate in respect to activity against human melanoma due to anaphylactoid reactions. In vitro cytotoxicity data with murine and human cell lines were reported for 14 novel marine chemicals with as yet undetermined mechanisms of action. This 1999 literature overview thus highlights the fact that the multinational effort aimed at the discovery of novel marine antitumor agents remained at the same level of research activity as during 1998. [References: 45]"	11724312	A. M. Mayer and V. K. Lehmann	MEDLINE2008	Effect of depsipeptide on in vitro transfection efficiency of PEI/DNA complexes	0	Anticancer Research	UNLABELLED: The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of depsipeptide on the in vitro transfection efficiency of PEI/DNA complexes. MATERIALS AND METHODS: PEI (polyethylenimine 25K) formed a complex with pcDNA3-CMV-Luc and was investigated for its transfection efficiency in KB human oral carcinoma and Raji human lymphoma cell lines. The transfected cells were then incubated with different concentrations of depsipeptide for 24 h and examined for the transfection efficiency and cell viability. RESULTS: The transfection efficiency in KB cells post-incubated with depsipeptide was not different from the cells transfected with PEI alone. The transfection efficiency in Raji cells post-incubated with 15 nM depsipeptide was significantly increased (p < 0.05) and found to be 76-fold compared to the cells transfected with PEI alone. Depsipeptide had no effect on the cell viability at a concentration of 0.001-1 nM in KB cells and 1-37.5 nM in Raji cells. A high concentration of depsipeptide decreased the cell viability in both cell lines. CONCLUSION: The results demonstrate that PEI/DNA complexes post-incubated with depsipeptide can enhance the transfection efficiency in the Raji human lymphoma cell line. The effect of depsipeptide on cell viability was dose-dependent. This study suggests that depsipeptide may have potential usefulness for gene delivery in patients with lymphoma.	18507022	"W. Weecharangsan, P. Opanasopit and R. J. Lee"	MEDLINE2002	"Quantitative analysis of cereulide, the emetic toxin of Bacillus cereus, produced under various conditions"	0	Applied & Environmental Microbiology	"This paper describes a quantitative and sensitive chemical assay for cereulide, the heat-stable emetic toxin produced by Bacillus cereus. The methods previously available for measuring cereulide are bioassays that give a toxicity titer, but not an accurate concentration. The dose of cereulide causing illness in humans is therefore not known, and thus safety limits for cereulide cannot be indicated. We developed a quantitative and sensitive chemical assay for cereulide based on high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) connected to ion trap mass spectrometry. This chemical assay and a bioassay based on boar sperm motility inhibition were calibrated with purified cereulide and with valinomycin, a structurally similar cyclic depsipeptide. The boar spermatozoan motility assay and chemical assay gave uniform results over a wide range of cereulide concentrations, ranging from 0.02 to 230 microg ml(-1). The detection limit for cereulide and valinomycin by HPLC-mass spectrometry was 10 pg per injection. The combined chemical and biological assays were used to define conditions and concentrations of cereulide formation by B. cereus strains F4810/72, NC7401, and F5881. Cereulide production commenced at the end of logarithmic growth, but was independent of sporulation. Production of cereulide was enhanced by incubation with shaking compared to static conditions. The three emetic B. cereus strains accumulated 80 to 166 microg of cereulide g(-1) (wet weight) when grown on solid medium. Strain NC7401 accumulated up to 25 microg of cereulide ml(-1) in liquid medium at room temperature (21 +/- 1 degrees C) in 1 to 3 days, during the stationary growth phase when cell density was 2 x 10(8) to 6 x 10(8) CFU ml(-1). Cereulide production at temperatures at and below 8 degrees C or at 40 degrees C was minimal."	11976124	"M. M. Haggblom, C. Apetroaie, M. A. Andersson and M. S. Salkinoja-Salonen"	MEDLINE2007	HDAC inhibitors: clinical update and mechanism-based potential	0	Biochemical Pharmacology	"Recently, the role of transcriptional repression through epigenetic modulation in carcinogenesis has been clinically validated with several inhibitors of histone deacetylases and DNA methyltransferases. It has long been recognized that epigenetic alterations of tumor suppressor genes was one of the contributing factors in carcinogenesis. Inhibitors of histone deacetylase (HDAC) de-repress genes that subsequently result in growth inhibition, differentiation and apoptosis of cancer cells. Vorinostat (SAHA), romidepsin (depsipeptide, FK-228), belinostat (PXD101) and LAQ824/LBH589 have demonstrated therapeutic benefit as monotherapy in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) and have also demonstrated some therapeutic benefit in other malignancies. The approval of the HDAC inhibitor vorinostat (Zolinzatrade mark) was based on the inherent sensitivity of this type of lymphoma to alterations in acetylation patterns that resulted in the induction of repressed apoptotic pathways. However, the full potential of these inhibitors (epigenetic modulators) is still on the horizon, as the true breadth of their utility as anti-cancer agents will be determined by the careful analysis of gene expression changes generated by these inhibitors and then combined with conventional chemotherapy to synergistically improve response and toxicity for an overall enhanced therapeutic benefit to the patient. The question that must be considered is whether the current HDACIs are being utilized to their fullest potential in clinical trials based on their mechanism-based alterations in disease processes."	17498667	K. B. Glaser	MEDLINE2008	"Inhibition of P-glycoprotein (ABCB1)- and multidrug resistance-associated protein 1 (ABCC1)-mediated transport by the orally administered inhibitor, CBT-1((R))"	0	Biochemical Pharmacology	"Cellular expression of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transport proteins, such as P-glycoprotein (Pgp), multidrug resistance-associated protein (MRP1), or ABCG2, is known to confer a drug-resistant phenotype. Thus, the development of effective transporter inhibitors could be of value to cancer treatment. CBT-1 is a bisbenzylisoquinoline plant alkyloid currently in development as a Pgp inhibitor. We characterized its interactions with the three major ABC transporters associated with drug resistance - Pgp, MRP1 and ABCG2 - and compared it to other known inhibitors. CBT-1 completely inhibited rhodamine 123 transport from Pgp-overexpressing cells at a concentration of 1muM. Additionally, 1 microM completely reversed Pgp-mediated resistance to vinblastine, paclitaxel and depsipeptide in SW620 Ad20 cells. CBT-1 was found to compete [(125)I]-IAAP labeling of Pgp with an IC(50) of 0.14 microM, and low concentrations of CBT-1 (<1 microM) stimulated Pgp-mediated ATP hydrolysis. In MRP1-overexpressing cells, 10 microM CBT-1 was found to completely inhibit MRP1-mediated calcein transport. CBT-1 at 25 microM did not have a significant effect on ABCG2-mediated pheophorbide a transport. Serum levels of CBT-1 in samples obtained from eight patients receiving CBT-1 increased intracellular rhodamine 123 levels in CD56+ cells 2.1- to 5.7-fold in an ex vivo assay. CBT-1 is able to inhibit the ABC transporters Pgp and MRP1, making it an attractive candidate for clinical trials in cancers where Pgp and/or MRP1 might be overexpressed. Further clinical studies with CBT-1 are warranted."	18234154	"R. W. Robey, S. Shukla, E. M. Finley, R. K. Oldham, D. Barnett, S. V. Ambudkar, T. Fojo and S. E. Bates"	MEDLINE1999	Determinants for differential effects on D-Ala-D-lactate vs D-Ala-D-Ala formation by the VanA ligase from vancomycin-resistant enterococci	0	Biochemistry	"Bacteria with either intrinsic or inducible resistance to vancomycin make peptidoglycan (PG) precursors of lowered affinity for the antibiotic by switching the PG-D-Ala-D-Ala termini that are the antibiotic-binding target to either PG-D-Ala-D-lactate or PG-D-Ala-D-Ser as a consequence of altered specificity of the D-Ala-D-X ligases in the cell wall biosynthetic pathway. The VanA ligase of vancomycin-resistant enterococci, a D-Ala-D-lactate depsipeptide ligase, has the ability to recognize and activate the weak nucleophile D-lactate selectively over D-Ala(2) to capture the D-Ala(1)-OPO(3)(2)(-) intermediate in the ligase active site. To ensure this selectivity in catalysis, VanA largely rejects the protonated (NH(3)(+)) form of D-Ala at subsite 2 (K(M2) of 210 mM at pH 7.5) but not at subsite 1. In contrast, the deprotonated (NH(2)) form of D-Ala (K(M2) of 0.66 mM, k(cat) of 550 min(-)(1)) is a 17-fold better substrate compared to D-lactate (K(M) of 0.69 mM, k(cat) of 32 min(-)(1)). The low concentration of the free amine form of D-Ala at physiological conditions (i.e., 0.1% at pH 7.0) explains the inefficiency of VanA in dipeptide synthesis. Mutational analysis revealed a residue in the putative omega-loop region, Arg242, which is partially responsible for electrostatically repelling the protonated form of D-Ala(2). The VanA enzyme represents a subfamily of D-Ala-D-X ligases in which two key active-site residues (Lys215 and Tyr216) in the active-site omega-loop of the Escherichia coli D-Ala-D-Ala ligase are absent. To look for functional complements in VanA, we have mutated 20 residues and evaluated effects on catalytic efficiency for both D-Ala-D-Ala dipeptide and D-Ala-D-lactate depsipeptide ligation. Mutation of Asp232 caused substantial defects in both dipeptide and depsipeptide ligase activity, suggesting a role in maintaining the loop position. In contrast, the H244A mutation caused an increase in K(M2) for D-lactate but not D-Ala, indicating a differential role for His244 in the recognition of the weaker nucleophile D-lactate. Replacement of the VanA omega-loop by that of VanC2, a D-Ala-D-Ser ligase, eliminated D-Ala-D-lactate activity while improving by 3-fold the catalytic efficacy of D-Ala-D-Ala and D-Ala-D-Ser activity."	10529248	"I. A. Lessard, V. L. Healy, I. S. Park and C. T. Walsh"	MEDLINE1991	"N-(phenylacetyl)glycyl-D-aziridine-2-carboxylate, an acyclic amide substrate of beta-lactamases: importance of the shape of the substrate in beta-lactamase evolution"	0	Biochemistry	"Certain acyclic depsipeptides, but not peptides, are substrates of typical beta-lactamases [Pratt, R.F., & Govardhan, C.P. (1984) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 81, 1302]. This may reflect either the greater chemical reactivity of depsipeptides (and of beta-lactams, the natural substrates) than peptides or the greater ease of distortion of the depsipeptide (ester) than the peptide (amide) group into a penicillin-like conformation. The latter explanation has been shown to be more likely by employment of a novel beta-lactamase substrate. N-(phenylacetyl)glycyl-D-aziridine-2-carboxylate, which combines a high chemical reactivity with a close to tetrahedral amide nitrogen atom. Although this substrate was better (higher kcat/KM) than a comparable depsipeptide for beta-lactamases, it was poorer than the depsipeptide for the Streptomyces R61 D-alanyl-D-alanine peptidase (which catalyzes specific peptide hydrolysis). It therefore seems likely that one vital feature of the putative evolution of a DD-peptidase into a beta-lactamase would have been modification of the active site to, on one hand, accommodate bicyclic beta-lactams and, on the other, exclude productive binding of planar acyclic amides. Certain serine beta-lactamases and the R61 DD-peptidase also catalyze methanolysis and aminolysis by D-phenylalanine of the N-acylaziridine. The latter reaction, the first amide aminolysis shown to be catalyzed by a beta-lactamase, is a very close analogue of the transpeptidase reaction of DD-peptidases. The methanolysis reaction appeared to proceed by way of the same acyl-enzyme intermediate as formed from depsipeptides possessing the same acyl moiety as the aziridine. The kinetics of methanolysis were employed to determine whether acylation or deacylation was rate limiting to the hydrolysis reaction under saturating substrate concentrations. The kinetics of the aminolysis reaction, catalyzed by the Enterobacter cloacae P99 beta-lactamase, showed the characteristics of, and were interpreted in terms of, a sequential mechanism previously deduced for depsipeptides and this enzyme [Pazhanisamy, S., & Pratt, R. F. (1989) Biochemistry 28, 6875-6882]. This mechanism features two separate binding sites, only one of which is productive. Strikingly, the binding of the N-acylaziridine to the nonproductive site was very tight, such that essentially all hydrolysis at substrate concentrations above 0.1Km proceeded via the ternary complex; this could also be true of penicillins."	2015222	B. P. Murphy and R. F. Pratt	MEDLINE1995	"Structural, physical, and biological characteristics of RNA.DNA binding agent N8-actinomycin D"	0	Biochemistry	"The crystal structure of the self-complementary DNA octamer d(GAAGCTTC)2 complexed with N8-actinomycin D (N8AMD) has been determined at 3.0 A resolution (space group: P3(1)21; unit cell: a = 62.30, b = 62.30, c = 42.97 A; R = 0.173 for 1845 reflections). The DNA structure was severely distorted by the N8AMD bound intercalatively into the middle dinucleotide, 5'-GC-3'. The two cyclic depsipeptides, which differ from each other in overall conformation, lie in the minor groove. The complex is further stabilized by forming base--peptide and chromophore--backbone hydrogen bonds. The complexes are stacked together to form a pseudocontinuous helix running through the crystals. The structure of d(GAAGCTTC)2-actinomycin D (AMD) crystallized in the space group C2 [Kamitori S., & Takusagawa, F. (1992) J. Mol. Biol. 225, 445-456] was re-refined in order to compare it directly to the N8AMD complex structure. The asymmetrical binding mode of AMD has been confirmed on the basis of the two complex structures. The crystal structures of the N8AMD and AMD complexes bound to the same d(GAAGCTTC)2 differed by a root-mean-square deviation on all atom positions of 1.77 A, but most of the structural differences can be attributed to molecular packing in two different crystal forms, and not to structural differences induced by the interaction with the intercalating agents. However, the DNA binding and biological characteristics of N8AMD and AMD are quite different from each other. The DNA association constant of N8AMD is 33-fold less than that of AMD in an aqueous solution. N8AMD required a concentration > 10.0 microM to inhibit RNA synthesis activity in HeLa cells by 50%, whereas AMD reached to the same inhibitory level at only 35 nM. The structure of the DNA-N8AMD complex suggested that substitution of the N-methyl-L-valine residue in the cyclic depsipeptide with a N-methyl-D-valine residue might increase the hydrophobic interaction with the minor groove of the DNA. Thus the DNA association constant and RNA synthesis inhibitory activities of 5,5'-N-methyl-D-valine AMD (D-MeVal-AMD) have also been determined. The DNA association constant of D-MeVal-AMD is more than 2-fold greater than that of AMD, and the RNA synthesis inhibitory activity is about 20-fold greater."	7541244	"M. Shinomiya, W. Chu, R. G. Carlson, R. F. Weaver and F. Takusagawa"	MEDLINE2007	Exhibition of soft and tenacious characteristics based on liquid crystal formation by introduction of cholesterol groups on biodegradable lactide copolymer	0	Biomacromolecules	"Cholesterol side-functionalized poly(depsipeptide- co- dl-lactide) (PGD- dl-LA-(cholesterol) n ) and poly(depsipeptide) (PGD-(cholesterol) n) were prepared as novel biodegradable liquid crystalline (LC) polymers. These polymer films exhibited different LC phases depending on the cholesterol unit content in the polymers. The thermodynamic stability of these LC phases was quite high, and PGD-(cholesterol) n film exhibited continuous LC phases up to 202 degrees C. The resulting cholesterol LC phases were indicated to act as physical cross-linking points to form noncovalent network structures among the polymer chains. Therefore, PGD- dl-LA-(cholesterol) n film exhibited a rubbery and stretchy nature at 37 degrees C due to physical cross-linking points based on cholesterol LC phase well-dispersed in the film. The cholesterol side-group effects leading to rubbery character and hydrolytic resistance reported herein are rather unique. The biodegradable LC material exhibiting a soft and tenacious nature is a promising candidate for a new class of implant biomaterials used with dynamic organs of the body such as the heart and blood vessels."	17979242	"K. Nagahama, Y. Ueda, T. Ouchi and Y. Ohya"	MEDLINE1985	Channel structures in synthetic polypeptides with alternating configurations. Conformational analysis of poly(DL-proline)	0	Biophysical Chemistry	"Theoretical conformational analysis of L,D alternating sequences of poly alpha-amino acids is reported in connection with the ability of naturally occurring peptide and depsipeptide having alternating configurations to increase selectively the ion permeability across membranes. The most stable structures of poly(DL-proline), of which the conformational variability is practically limited to the choice between cis and trans conformations of the peptide bonds, were characterized. The all-trans conformation results in a flat helical structure possessing the main features for acting as an ion channel across membranes as actually found experimentally. Random cis-trans conformational sequences provide an alternative mechanism of ion transport intermediate between the ion channel and the ion carrier."	17007773	"P. De Santis, A. Palleschi, M. Savino and A. Scipioni"	MEDLINE1991	Conformational heterogeneity of quinoxaline peptides in solution	0	Biopolymers	"The conformational heterogeneity of several quinoxaline antibiotics, a class of naturally occurring quinoxaline peptides with antitumor properties, and their synthetic analogues was investigated in polar and nonpolar solvents by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) with uv photodiode array detection, uv-absorbance, low-temperature phosphorescence, and nmr techniques. Multiple peak formation and interconversion in the HPLC and 1H-nmr analysis of triostin A, its under-N-methylated synthetic analogues (des-N-tetramethyltriostin A [TANDEM] and [N-MeCys3, N-MeCys7]-TANDEM [MCTAN-DEM]), and echinomycin were examined as a function of temperature, solvent polarity, and residence time in solution prior to analysis. Slow interconversion between HPLC peaks, ascribed to the presence of multiple solution conformers, was exhibited by these peptides although at very different interconversion rates. Among the triostins, the rate of interconversion appeared to vary with the degree of N-methylation of the residues in the cyclic depsipeptide chain. Interconversion of the n and p conformers of triostin A in chloroform occurred on a chromatographic timescale (a few minutes with kn----p calculated to be 0.02 s-1 at 25 degrees C) while the solution conformers of TANDEM in methanol equilibrated very slowly to one preferred conformer over a period of several weeks at ambient temperature. MCTANDEM, a synthetic analogue of triostin A with an intermediate degree of N-methylation of the residues in the peptide ring, consisted of an equilibrium mixture of n and p conformers in methanol that interconverted on a chromatographic time scale. Two additional conformers of MCTANDEM developed within a few weeks' residence time in methanol at ambient temperature. Echinomycin was found to exist in methanol as an interconverting mixture of at least four minor conformers in addition to the major isoform (95% by peak area) of the peptide. The solution conformers of the quinoxaline peptides investigated in this report are most likely a consequence of hindered rotation about the N-methylated peptide bonds in the depsipeptide ring and/or intramolecular hydrogen bonding."	1793810	"T. V. Alfredson, A. H. Maki and M. J. Waring"	MEDLINE1992	Molecular structure of cyclo[-(D-Val-L-Hyi-L-Val-D-Hyi)2-] revealed by x-ray analysis	0	Biopolymers	"The crystal structure of a synthetic analogue of valinomycin, cyclo[-(D-Val-L-Hyi-L-Val-D-Hyi)2-] (octa-meso-valinomycin) (I) (C40H68N4O12.1.5.C4H8O2, M(r) = 937.01 + 88.10), has been determined. Crystals grown from dioxane are monoclinic, space group P2(1)/a, with cell parameters a = 21.487 (8), b = 16.836 (5), c = 16.089 (4) A, beta = 111.70 (4), and Z = 4. The atomic coordinates for nonhydrogen atoms were refined in the anisotropic thermal motion approximation. H atom positions were included in the structure factor calculations at their geometrically expected positions. Values of the standard and weighted R factors after refinement are 0.11 and 0.13, respectively. The conformation of the depsipeptide crystallized from dioxane is different from that crystallized from chloroform (II). The molecule adopts a rectangular shape with two type IV beta-turns containing a hydrogen bond and possesses pseudorotational symmetry. The side chains are located on the molecular periphery. The orientation of the carbonyl groups of the molecule is not conducive for efficient metal-ion coordination and in the observed conformation cannot behave as an ionophore. In the crystal the molecules form infinite chains parallel to the c axis, and are stabilized by two intermolecular hydrogen bonds that are shorter and have better geometry than the intramolecular hydrogen bonds. A phi/psi plot for dodecadepsipeptides with a (DLLD)3 sequence has well-defined areas for Val and Hyi residues only in cases when the crystals have been grown from nonpolar or medium-polar solvents. The phi/psi plot for octadepsipeptides crystallized from chloroform (II) shows this behavior also.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)"	1391629	"P. Grochulski, G. D. Smith, D. A. Langs, W. L. Duax, V. Z. Pletnev and V. T. Ivanov"	MEDLINE2004	"Addition of a peptide fragment on an alpha-helical depsipeptide induces alpha/3(10)-conjugated helix: synthesis, crystal structure, and CD spectra of Boc-Leu-Leu-Ala-(Leu-Leu-Lac)3-Leu-Leu-OEt"	0	Biopolymers	"The depsipeptide Boc(1)-Leu(2)-Leu(3)-Ala(4)-Leu(5)-Leu(6)-Lac(7)-Leu(8)-Leu(9)-Lac(10)-Leu(11)-Leu(12)-Lac(13)-Leu(14)-Leu(15)-OEt(16) (1) (Boc = tert-butyloxycarbonyl, Lac = L-lactic acid residue) has been synthesized from the peptide Boc-Leu-Leu-Ala-OEt (2) and a depsipeptide, Boc-(Leu-Leu-Lac)(3)-Leu-Leu-OEt (3). Single crystals of 1 were successfully obtained and the structure has been solved by direct methods (such as Sir2002 and Shake-and-Bake). Interestingly, 1 adopts an alpha/3(10)-conjugated helix containing a kink at the junction of peptide and depsipeptide segments, Leu3-Lac7. This is significantly different from the conformation of 3, which has a straight alpha-helical structure with standard phi and psi angles. Microcrystalline CD spectra were also studied to compare structural properties of 1 and 3. The differences between alpha/3(10)- and alpha-helices appear in these CD spectra."	15316916	"H. Oku, T. Ohyama, A. Hiroki, K. Yamada, K. Fukuyama, H. Kawaguchi and R. Katakai"	MEDLINE1999	"Depsipeptide (FR901228): a novel therapeutic agent with selective, in vitro activity against human B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells.[Erratum appears in Blood 2000 Jan 15;95(2):409]"	0	Blood	"Therapy of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) has been limited by both the nonselectivity of therapeutic agents toward normal residual immune cells and inherent drug resistance. Identification of agents that spare normal immune effector cells, thus facilitating addition of immune-based therapies, and that modulate factors associated with drug resistance in CLL might represent a major therapeutic advance. Depsipeptide (FR901228) is a novel agent entering clinical trials that has selective in vitro activity against resistant leukemia cell lines. To assess its in vitro activity in CLL, we exposed peripheral mononuclear cells from CLL patients (n = 10) to varying concentrations of this agent. Viability of the CLL cells was reduced by 50% (LC(50)) at 4 hours, 24 hours, and 4 days at depsipeptide concentrations of 0.038, 0.024, and 0.015 micromol/L, respectively. Depsipeptide had marked selective cytotoxicity when compared with normal blood mononuclear cells, in which the LC(50) was 3.44 micromol/L at 4 hours (P =.03), 0.965 micromol/L at 24 hours (P =.01), and 0.0318 micromol/L at 96 hours (P =.04). Inhibition of bone marrow progenitor cell growth was also minimal after incubation with 0.015 micromol/L (19% inhibition of colony forming unit-granulocyte-macrophage [CFU-GM]; 17% inhibition burst forming unit-erythroid [BFU-E]) and 3.44 micromol/L (24% inhibition of CFU-GM; 57% inhibition BFU-E) of depsipeptide for 4 hours, followed by a 14-day incubation period. Expression of apoptotic proteins after depsipeptide exposure (0.015 micromol/L) included no change in bcl-2, elevation of bax, and decreased expression of p27. These data demonstrate that depsipeptide has significant selective in vitro activity against human CLL cells concurrent with favorable alterations of the bcl-2:bax protein ratio and decrease in p27 expression. Such findings strongly support the early introduction of depsipeptide into clinical trials for patients with CLL."	10438728	"J. C. Byrd, C. Shinn, R. Ravi, C. R. Willis, J. K. Waselenko, I. W. Flinn, N. A. Dawson and M. R. Grever"	MEDLINE2000	Up-regulation of costimulatory/adhesion molecules by histone deacetylase inhibitors in acute myeloid leukemia cells	0	Blood	"Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) have been used to focus on the effects of inducing gene expression through the acetylation of histones which results in chromatin remodeling. The study explored whether HDACIs could induce the expression of costimulatory/adhesion molecules on acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells, thereby effectively inducing tumor immunity. The expression of CD80, CD86, human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DR, HLA-ABC, and intracellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) was tested in human AML cell lines after the addition of HDACI, sodium butyrate (SB). Generally, increased expression of CD86 was observed by SB treatment in a majority of cell lines, and ICAM-1 was expressed in fewer cell lines. Essentially the same results were obtained using other HDACIs such as FR901228, trichostatin A, and trapoxin A. Quantitation of transcripts of CD86 accompanied with RNA synthesis inhibition assay and nuclear run-on assay revealed that SB up-regulates the CD86 expression transcriptionally. Furthermore, chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments showed that HDACI treatment caused remarkable acetylation on histone H3 and H4 at CD86 promoter chromatin in vivo. In 30 clinical AML samples, CD86 expression was significantly increased (P <.001) by SB treatment, and the expression of HLA-DR and ICAM-1 was moderately increased (P <.05) by SB treatment. Finally, the allogeneic mixed leukocyte reaction (allo-MLR) against HL60 cells pretreated with SB was enhanced 4-fold compared with allo-MLR obtained with non-treated HL60 cells. These results suggest that the immunotherapeutic use of HDACIs may become a novel tool for treatment of AML. (Blood. 2000;96:3847-3856)"	11090069	"T. Maeda, M. Towatari, H. Kosugi and H. Saito"	MEDLINE2001	"Inhibitor of histone deacetylation, depsipeptide (FR901228), in the treatment of peripheral and cutaneous T-cell lymphoma: a case report"	0	Blood	"Depsipeptide, FR901228, has demonstrated potent in vitro and in vivo cytotoxic activity against murine and human tumor cell lines. In the laboratory, it has been shown to be a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor. In a phase I trial of depsipeptide conducted at the National Cancer Institute, 3 patients with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma had a partial response, and 1 patient with peripheral T-cell lymphoma, unspecified, had a complete response. Sezary cells isolated from patients after treatment had increased histone acetylation. These results suggest that inhibition of HDAC is a novel and potentially effective therapy for patients with T-cell lymphoma."	11675364	"R. L. Piekarz, R. Robey, V. Sandor, S. Bakke, W. H. Wilson, L. Dahmoush, D. M. Kingma, M. L. Turner, R. Altemus and S. E. Bates"	MEDLINE1998	"In vitro activity of aplidine, a new marine-derived anti-cancer compound, on freshly explanted clonogenic human tumour cells and haematopoietic precursor cells"	0	British Journal of Cancer	"Aplidine is a new marine anti-cancer depsipeptide isolated from the Mediterranean tunicate Aplidium albicans. We have evaluated its antiproliferative action against a variety of freshly explanted human tumour specimens. Concentration ranges of 0.01-1.0 microM and 0.0001-1.0 microM were used in short- and long-term exposure schedules respectively. After exposure for 1 h in 49 evaluable specimens, aplidine showed a clear concentration-dependent anti-tumour effect. At 0.05 microM, 85% of the specimens were markedly inhibited. Continuous exposure for 21-28 days in 54 tumour specimens also led to a concentration-dependent activity relationship. Fifty per cent and 100% tumour inhibitions were achieved with 0.001 microM and 0.05 microM respectively. A head to head evaluation assessing short vs continuous exposure was carried out, resulting in evidence of an activity-time of exposure relationship. Breast, melanoma and non-small-cell lung cancer appear to be sensitive to low concentrations of aplidine. In addition the evaluation of the effects of aplidine on haematopoietic cells showed a concentration-dependent toxicity. However, under continuous exposure, active concentrations induced mild bone marrow toxicity, indicating that a therapeutic window at marginally myelotoxic concentrations might exist."	9743292	"H. Depenbrock, R. Peter, G. T. Faircloth, I. Manzanares, J. Jimeno and A. R. Hanauske"	MEDLINE1991	A phase I clinical trial of didemnin B	0	Cancer	"Didemnin B is a depsipeptide extracted from the marine tunicate Trididemnin cyanophorum. This agent is a potent inhibitor of L1210 growth in vitro and has activity against murine B16 melanoma, P388 leukemia, and M5076 sarcoma in vivo. The results of preclinical toxicologic tests demonstrated abnormalities in clotting parameters thought to be secondary to drug-induced liver dysfunction. Thirty-five patients with advanced cancer received didemnin B according to a 5-day bolus schedule with dose levels ranging from 0.03 to 2.00 mg/m2/d. The dose-limiting toxicity was nausea and vomiting. Sporadic elevation of the hepatic enzyme level occurred but was not dose limiting. Two patients had anaphylactic symptoms possibly related to the 5% polyoxyethylated castor oil (Cremophor EL, BASF, Ludwigshafen, Germany) vehicle during the drug infusion. Clinical bleeding was not observed and myelosuppression was not significant. No partial or complete tumor responses were seen. The recommended Phase II dose for the 5-day schedule is 1.6 mg/m2/d."	1933801	"J. A. Stewart, J. B. Low, J. D. Roberts and A. Blow"	MEDLINE2007	Drug-induced inactivation or gene silencing of class I histone deacetylases suppresses ovarian cancer cell growth: implications for therapy	0	Cancer Biology & Therapy	"There is an urgent need to develop new strategies to treat ovarian cancer, the most deadly gynecologic malignancy. Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are emerging as novel therapeutic drugs in the treatment of a variety of cancers, including those resistant to standard chemotherapy. Since there are multiple HDAC isoforms, determining the precise role of individual HDAC isoenzymes in the growth and progression of ovarian cancer has the potential to influence the use of selective HDAC inhibitors as strategic therapeutic agents that elicit fewer undesirable side effects. Unfortunately, there is limited information about the expression of HDAC isoforms in human ovarian tissues. This report provides evidence for the first time that Class I HDACs are expressed at significantly higher levels in ovarian cancers in comparison to normal ovarian tissues, with no significant difference in Class II HDAC expression between the two groups. Furthermore, ovarian cancer cells are far more sensitive than normal ovarian cells to the potent HDAC inhibitor romidepsin (FK228), a drug that displays greater inhibitory selectivity for Class I HDACs over Class II isoforms. Using small interfering RNA (siRNA) methodology, we demonstrate that knocking down the gene expression of HDAC3 and other members of the Class I HDAC family suppresses ovarian cancer cell growth. Taken together, the present studies offer several novel findings that have direct relevance for the strategic use of inhibitors that target Class I HDACs, particularly HDAC3, in the treatment of ovarian cancer."	17387270	"D. Khabele, D.-S. Son, A. K. Parl, G. L. Goldberg, L. H. Augenlicht, J. M. Mariadason and V. M. Rice"	MEDLINE2005	Histone deacetylase inhibitors modulate renal cell carcinoma sensitivity to TRAIL/Apo-2L-induced apoptosis by enhancing TRAIL-R2 expression	0	Cancer Biology & Therapy	"Every year, 12,000 people in the U.S. die from renal cell carcinoma. Current therapies include partial or complete nephrectomy or treatments such as administration of IFN-alpha and/or interleukins that are moderately effective, at best. Moreover, the current therapies are invasive and inefficient and new therapies are needed. Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors have recently been found to sensitize cells to apoptosis-inducing agents, although the mechanism of this action is largely unknown. The current study has investigated the potential of using five different histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACI) (depsipeptide, MS-275, oxamflatin, sodium butyrate, and trichostatin A) to sensitize TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)/Apo-2L-resistant renal cell carcinoma cells to TRAIL/Apo-2L-induced apoptosis. Sodium butyrate and trichostatin A each enhanced TRAIL/Apo-2L-mediated tumor cell death to a greater extent than the other HDACI. Annexin V staining and caspase activity demonstrated the mechanism of cell death was apoptosis. Both sodium butyrate and trichostatin A treatment also increased mRNA and surface expression of TRAIL receptor 2 that was dependent on the transcription factor Sp1, thus providing a possible mechanism behind the increased sensitivity to TRAIL/Apo-2L. These results indicate that combination therapy of HDACI, such as sodium butyrate and trichostatin A, and TRAIL/Apo-2L has great potential for an efficient alternative therapy for renal cell carcinoma."	16096370	"R. L. VanOosten, J. M. Moore, B. Karacay and T. S. Griffith"	MEDLINE2008	"Aurora A, Aurora B and survivin are novel targets of transcriptional regulation by histone deacetylase inhibitors in non-small cell lung cancer"	0	Cancer Biology & Therapy	"BACKGROUND: Analysis of biopsies from a recent clinical trial suggested that Depsipeptide FK228 (DP) inhibits Aurora kinase expression in lung cancer cells. The present study was undertaken to confirm and extend these observations. RESULTS: Aurora A and B mRNA levels in lung cancer cells were considerably higher than levels in normal pulmonary epithelia. DP, TSA and SAHA inhibited Aurora A, Aurora B and survivin expression with kinetics that were remarkably similar within individual cell lines, and appeared to coincide with p53 expression status. These effects were not observed following treatment with geldanamycins. Inhibition of Aurora B transcription coincided with decreased H3K9Ac and H3K4Me2 activation marks, and accumulation of H3K9Me3, as well as MBD1, MBD2 and MBD3 repression marks within the minimal Aurora B promoter. Knockdown of MBD1, -2 or -3 did not reproducibly abrogate inhibition of Aurora or survivin expression by DP or TSA. DP and TSA decreased expression and altered localization of Aurora kinases and survivin, resulting in mitotic catastrophe in lung cancer cells. METHODS: Aurora A, and Aurora B levels in lung cancer cells and normal respiratory epithelia were assessed using quantitative RT-PCR techniques. These methods, as well as as Western blots were used to examine expression of Auroras A/B, and several related genes/proteins in lung cancer cells exposed to DP, TSA, SAHA and geldanamycins. Transient transfection promoter-reporter assays, and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) techniques were used to examine DP-mediated changes in activity and chromatin structure of the Aurora B promoter. Confocal imaging techniques were used to examine the effects of DP and TSA on mitotic progression in lung cancer cells. CONCLUSIONS: Novel transcriptional regulatory mechanisms involving Aurora kinase and survivin appear to contribute to cytotoxicity mediated by HDAC inhibitors in lung cancer cells."	18708766	"X.-H. Zhang, M. Rao, J. A. Loprieato, J. A. Hong, M. Zhao, G.-Z. Chen, A. E. Humphries, D. M. Nguyen, J. B. Trepel, X. Yu and D. S. Schrump"	MEDLINE1983	Antitumor activity of didemnin B in the human tumor stem cell assay	0	Cancer Chemotherapy & Pharmacology	"In vitro studies of the schedule dependency and cytotoxicity of didemnin B, a novel depsipeptide isolated from a Carribean tunicate (Didemnidae), were carried out in fresh tumor cells obtained from biopsies from 39 cancer patients using the human tumor stem cell assay. Two schedules of drug exposure were examined (1 h and continuous exposure in the agar). Tumor cells from nine of 26 patients (34.6%) showed reduced survival of tumor-colony forming units to 30% of control or less at the 0.01 microgram level in the continuous exposure studies. Cells from eight of 17 patients (47%) showed a similar degree of sensitivity to didemnin after a 1-h exposure to 0.1 microgram prior to plating. The median ID50 values were 4.2 X 10(-3) micrograms/ml and 46 X 10(-3) micrograms/ml for continuous and 1-h exposures, respectively. A clear dose-response relationship was observed with both dosage schedules. Comparison of the slopes of the continuous and 1-h exposures and of the ID50 of the drug schedules suggests that didemnin is a cell-cycle-non-specific cytotoxic agent. Significant in vitro antitumor activity was observed at low concentrations against carcinomas of the breast, ovary, and kidney, and also mesothelioma and sarcoma. These results can provide pharmacologic goals to be achieved in phase I clinical trial. Further in vitro testing should help select tumor types for study in phase II trials of this very promising new anticancer drug."	6883622	"T. L. Jiang, R. H. Liu and S. E. Salmon"	MEDLINE1991	Phase I/II clinical trial of didemnin B in non-small-cell lung cancer: neuromuscular toxicity is dose-limiting	0	Cancer Chemotherapy & Pharmacology	"Didemnin B (NSC 325,319), a cyclic depsipeptide isolated from a Caribbean tunicate, exhibits potent preclinical antitumor activity. In previous phase I studies, 3.47 mg/m2 was the maximally tolerated dose, with nausea and vomiting being the dose-limiting toxicity. The drug was given in a single bolus infusion over 30 min every 28 days. In the current study, 30 patients presenting with previously treated non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) received 46 courses of the drug at doses ranging from 3.47 to 9.1 mg/m2. Neuromuscular toxicity was dose-limiting. Nausea and vomiting appeared to be correlated with dose levels and were ameliorated by a combination of antiemetics including dexamethasone. Other side effects included a mild rise in hepatic enzymes and an allergic reaction that was preventable by the addition of corticosteroids to the premedication regimen. In all, 2 minor responses were seen among 24 evaluable patients. Because neuromuscular toxicity is dose-limiting, we recommend that routine measurements of creatine kinase and aldolase, a careful neurologic evaluation, and electromyography and muscle biopsy (if indicated) be incorporated into phase II trials. The recommended dose for phase II studies using a single bolus schedule is 6.3 mg/m2, following the premedication of patients with antiemetics."	1662119	"D. M. Shin, P. Y. Holoye, W. K. Murphy, A. Forman, S. C. Papasozomenos, W. K. Hong and M. Raber"	MEDLINE1996	"Characterization of the interaction of cryptophycin 1 with tubulin: binding in the Vinca domain, competitive inhibition of dolastatin 10 binding, and an unusual aggregation reaction"	0	Cancer Research	"The antimitotic depsipeptide cryptophycin 1 (CP1) was compared to the antimitotic peptide dolastatin 10 (D10) as an antiproliferative agent and in its interactions with purified tubulin. The potent activity of CP1 as an inhibitor of cell growth was confirmed. The agent had an IC50 of 20 pM against L1210 murine leukemia cells versus 0.5 nM for D10. Both drugs were comparable as inhibitors of the glutamate-induced assembly of purified tubulin, with D10 being slightly more potent. CP1, like D10, was a noncompetitive inhibitor of the binding of [3H]vinblastine to tubulin (apparent Ki, 3.9 microM); and the depsipeptide was a competitive inhibitor of the binding of [3H]D10 to tubulin (apparent Ki, 2.1 microM). CP1 was less potent than D10 as an inhibitor of nucleotide exchange on tubulin, but the two drugs were equivalent in stabilizing the colchicine binding activity of tubulin. CP1, like D10, caused the formation of extensive structured aggregates of tubulin when present in stoichiometric amounts relative to the protein. Whereas at lower concentrations the drugs were equivalent in causing formation of small oligomers detected by gel permeation high-performance liquid chromatography, there were notable differences in the aggregation reactions induced by the two drugs. The electron micrographic appearance of the D10-induced aggregate differed substantially from that of the CP1-induced aggregate. With D10, but not CP1, aggregate morphology was greatly altered in the presence of microtubule-associated proteins. Finally, although CP1 caused the formation of massive aggregates, as did D10, there was little turbidity change with the depsipeptide as opposed to the peptide."	8813133	"R. Bai, R. E. Schwartz, J. A. Kepler, G. R. Pettit and E. Hamel"	MEDLINE2004	Histone deacetylase inhibitors potentiate TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)-induced apoptosis in lymphoid malignancies	0	Cell Death & Differentiation	"New therapies are required for chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), an incurable disease characterized by failure of mature lymphocytes to undergo apoptosis. Activation of cell surface death receptors, such as via TRAIL receptor ligation, may provide a novel therapeutic target for various malignancies. However, CLL and other lymphoid malignancies are resistant to TRAIL. We report that low concentrations of histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, such as depsipeptide, which alone failed to induce apoptosis, markedly sensitize CLL cells and other primary lymphoid malignancies to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. These combinations caused little or no toxicity to normal lymphocytes. HDAC inhibitors sensitized resistant cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis by facilitating formation of an active death-inducing signalling complex (DISC), leading to the rapid activation of caspase-8. The facilitated DISC formation also occurred in the absence of TRAIL-R2 upregulation. Thus, the combination of HDAC inhibitors and TRAIL may be valuable in the treatment of various hemopoietic malignancies."	15608694	"S. Inoue, M. MacFarlane, N. Harper, L. M. C. Wheat, M. J. S. Dyer and G. M. Cohen"	MEDLINE2003	The histone deacetylase inhibitor FK228 preferentially enhances adenovirus transgene expression in malignant cells	0	Clinical Cancer Research	"PURPOSE: Efficient adenovirus infection requires coxsackie-adenovirus receptor (CAR) and alpha(v) integrin. Whereas many malignant cells express these proteins poorly, normal tissues, especially liver, express high levels and are susceptible to adenovirus infection. Our previous studies showed that treatment of cancer cell lines with low concentrations of the histone deacetylase inhibitor FK228 (FR901228, depsipeptide), a drug in Phase II clinical trials, before infection was associated with an increase in adenovirus transgene expression. The purpose of these studies was to analyze the effects of FK228 on cultured normal human cells before initiating animal studies. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Cancer and normal cells from the corresponding tissue were treated with FK228 and analyzed for the proteins needed for infection and the infection efficiency. RESULTS: Treatment of cancer cell lines with 1 ng/ml FK228 increased CAR RNA, alpha(v) integrin RNA, and histone H3 acetylation levels, and was associated with a 4-10-fold increase in the number of infected cells expressing the transgene. Similar treatment of normal human mammary epithelial cells, renal proximal tubule epithelial cells, and hepatocytes had little effect. The insensitivity of cultured normal cells may be explained, in part, by expression of the drug efflux pump P-glycoprotein, because addition of the P-glycoprotein inhibitor XR9576 (tariquidar) with FK228 resulted in increased histone acetylation and CAR expression. CONCLUSION: These studies suggest that low concentrations of FK228 preferentially increase the efficiency of adenoviral transgene expression in cancer cells compared with cultured normal cells from the corresponding tissue and may increase the efficiency of adenovirus therapies in vivo."	14614025	"M. E. Goldsmith, M. Kitazono, P. Fok, T. Aikou, S. Bates and T. Fojo"	MEDLINE2008	Phase I clinical and pharmacokinetic study of kahalalide F administered weekly as a 1-hour infusion to patients with advanced solid tumors	0	Clinical Cancer Research	"PURPOSE: A dose-escalation, phase I study evaluated the safety, pharmacokinetics, and efficacy of a weekly 1-h regimen of kahalalide F, a cyclic depsipeptide isolated from the marine mollusk Elysia rufescens, in adult patients with advanced solid tumors and no standard treatment available. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Patients received an i.v. 1-h infusion of kahalalide F once weekly until disease progression or unacceptable toxicity. The starting kahalalide F dose was 266 microg/m(2), and dose escalation proceeded based on the worst toxicity found in the previous cohort. RESULTS: Thirty-eight patients were enrolled at three Spanish institutions and received once-weekly kahalalide F 1-h infusions at doses between 266 and 1,200 microg/m(2). Dose-limiting toxicities consisted of transient grade 3/4 increases in transaminase blood levels. The maximum tolerated dose for this kahalalide F schedule was 800 microg/m(2), and the recommended dose for phase II studies was 650 microg/m(2). No accumulated toxicity was found. One patient with malignant melanoma had unconfirmed partial response, one patient with metastatic lung adenocarcinoma had minor response, and six patients with different types of metastatic solid tumors had stable disease for 2.8 to 12.7 months. The noncompartmental pharmacokinetics of this kahalalide F schedule was linear and showed a narrow distribution and short body residence. The transaminitis associated with kahalalide F was dose dependent. CONCLUSIONS: The maximum tolerated dose was 800 microg/m(2). Dose-limiting toxicities with weekly kahalalide F 1-h i.v. infusions were transient grade 3/4 increases in blood transaminase levels, and 650 microg/m(2) was declared the recommended dose for phase II studies. This schedule showed a favorable safety profile and hints of antitumor activity."	18281545	"B. Pardo, L. Paz-Ares, J. Tabernero, E. Ciruelos, M. Garcia, R. Salazar, A. Lopez, M. Blanco, A. Nieto, J. Jimeno, M. A. Izquierdo and J. M. Trigo"	MEDLINE2006	"Increased MDR1 expression in normal and malignant peripheral blood mononuclear cells obtained from patients receiving depsipeptide (FR901228, FK228, NSC630176)"	0	Clinical Cancer Research	"The increased expression of markers associated with a differentiated phenotype, such as P-glycoprotein (Pgp), follows treatment with histone deacetylase inhibitors. Because depsipeptide (FR901228, FK228, NSC630176) is a substrate for Pgp, up-regulation of the gene that encodes it, MDR1, would mean that depsipeptide induces its own mechanism of resistance. To examine the effect of depsipeptide on expression of ATP-binding cassette transporters associated with multidrug resistance, the kidney cancer cell lines 108, 121, 127, and 143 were treated with depsipeptide and evaluated by quantitative reverse transcription-PCR. Increased levels of MDR1 (1.3- to 6.3-fold) and ABCG2 (3.2- to 11.1-fold) but not MRP1 (0.9- to 1.3-fold) were observed. The induced Pgp transported the fluorescent substrates rhodamine 123, bisantrene, calcein-AM, BODIPY-vinblastine, and BODIPY-paclitaxel. In normal peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and circulating tumor cells obtained from patients receiving depsipeptide, increased levels of histone H3 acetylation were found. We next examined MDR1 levels in normal and malignant PBMCs obtained from 15 patients enrolled in clinical trials with depsipeptide and detected up to a 6-fold increase in normal PBMCs and up to an 8-fold increase in circulating tumor cells after depsipeptide administration. In one patient with Sezary syndrome, increased MDR1 gene expression was accompanied by increased cell surface Pgp expression in circulating Sezary cells as determined by measurement of MRK-16 staining by flow cytometry. These studies suggest that depsipeptide induces its own mechanism of resistance and thus provide a basis for clinical trials evaluating depsipeptide in combination with a Pgp inhibitor."	16533780	"R. W. Robey, Z. Zhan, R. L. Piekarz, G. L. Kayastha, T. Fojo and S. E. Bates"	MEDLINE2011	Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: the old and the new	0	"Clinical lymphoma, myeloma & leukemia"	"During the past decade we have witnessed a number of changes in the field of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), including new entities added to the classification as well as a better understanding of the biology of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). An understanding of the epigenetics of NHL is also contributing new agents for the management of this disorder. It has become increasingly clear that DLBCL is a biologically and clinically heterogeneous cell type. Two major categories are now recognized: germinal center B cell and activated B-cell (ABC) types. The former is associated with a good prognosis while the latter is known to have a more adverse outcome. With the use of routine immunohistochemical stains, these two types can be identified. The ABC type is known to be NFK-B dependent. NFK-B is a therapeutic target for bortezomib which is being investigated as treatment for this subtype of DLBCL. Several major changes in the classification will be discussed among which the most important are the recognition of so-called borderline entities. One of the two most common of these is the borderline DLBCL/Burkitt tumor (DLBCL/BL) which has features of both DLBCL and Burkitt's lymphoma. Many of the cases in this DLBCL/BL category contain a translocation of MYC as well as BCL2, so-called ""double-hit lymphomas"" which have a very aggressive clinical behavior. The second common borderline entity is the mediastinal grey zone NHL (MGZL) which has pathological features intermediate between primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma and nodular sclerosing Hodgkin lymphoma (NSHL). Overlapping clinical features include young age, male predominance, and localized mediastinal presentation. Anecdotal reports suggest MGZL is relatively resistant to Hodgkin-based chemotherapy. Epigenetic therapy represents a new concept. Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi)and DNA methyltransferase inhibitors constitute a promising new class of antineoplastic agents. They modify the expression of genes related to cancer development. In this review, we discuss the role of HDACi in lymphomagenesis as well as in treatment. To understand the benefits of HDACi in lymphoma treatment, we must appreciate the crucial interplay between BCL6, p53, and STAT3. The STAT3 oncogene is involved in the ABC type of DLBCL, an unfavorable and frequently therapy-refractory lymphoma. STAT3 can be effectively suppressed by several HDACi. We will summarize the results of recent trials with HDACi such as romidepsin, panobinostat and valproic acid that have shown significant preliminary activity in recurrent and refractory lymphomas. Their future role in front-line management remains to be determined. Copyright Copyright 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved."	22035756	F. Cabanillas	MEDLINE2012	An epigenetic approach to pancreatic cancer treatment: the prospective role of histone deacetylase inhibitors	0	Current Cancer Drug Targets	"Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is quite resistant to conventional treatments, and gemcitabine, the standard chemotherapeutic agent, offers only a small benefit. Development and progression of PDAC are complex processes involving dysregulation of multiple signal transduction pathways arising from not only genetic but also epigenetic alterations. This makes the epigenetic approach to the treatment of PDAC of great interest. Histone deacetylases, a family of enzymes that, by removal of acetyl groups from a variety of histone and nonhistone proteins, play an important role in the epigenetic regulation of gene expression, are frequently dysregulated in PDAC. In particular, overexpression of class I histone deacetylases has been related to higher tumor grade, poor prognosis and development of chemoresistance. Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs), a novel class of agents endowed with pleiotropic antitumor effects, appear promising either for their preferential toxicity towards transformed as compared to normal cells and their ability to synergistically enhance the anticancer activity of radiotherapy and many chemotherapeutic agents. Many HDACIs have been shown to increase the antiproliferative and proapoptotic effects of gemcitabine, 5-fluorouracil and bortezomib, a new proteasome inhibitor, in vitro and in vivo PDAC xenograft models. MGCD0103, romidepsin, panobinostat, vorinostat and valproic acid, are currently being tested in association with radiotherapy or chemotherapy (gemcitabine, fluoropyrimidines, proteasome inhibitors) in phase I-II clinical trials in patients with locally advanced or metastatic PDAC."	22309455	"N. Tinari, M. De Tursi, A. Grassadonia, M. Zilli, L. Stuppia, S. Iacobelli and C. Natoli"	MEDLINE2009	The changing face of HDAC inhibitor depsipeptide	0	Current Cancer Drug Targets	"Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are currently used in the study of epigenetics and have potential in clinical cancer therapy. A novel and potent HDAC inhibitor, depsipeptide, also known as FK228 or FR901228, is highly efficient in inhibiting the activity of HDACs even at nanomolar concentrations. Depsipeptide has a unique structure that is distinct from most of the other HDACs, and it thus exhibits diverse pharmacologic functions. In addition, depsipeptide has a metabolic activation pathway, which affects many intracellular processes. However, the specific features of this pathway are as yet not completely worked out. In this article, we will focus on the uniqueness of this molecule's specific structure, the relationship of this structure to its putative metabolic activation pathway, and specifically review its newly discovered biological functions and clinical applications. [References: 112]"	19200053	W. Zhou and W.-G. Zhu	MEDLINE2002	FR-901228 Fujisawa/National Cancer Institute	0	Current Opinion in Investigational Drugs	"The depsipeptide FR-901228 is a histone deacetylas inhibitor under development by Fujisawa and the National Cancer Institute as a potential treatment for neoplasm. By May 2002, phase II trials had commenced in the US [452248], [461017]. [References: 45]"	12498018	D. M. Vigushin	MEDLINE2010	Histone deacetylase inhibitors in lymphoma	0	Current Opinion in Oncology	"PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Although many advances have been made in the treatment of lymphoma in the past decade, the treatment of patients with relapsed and refractory disease remains challenging. Only a fraction of patients will be cured with salvage therapy and transplantation. For those patients that are either ineligible or relapse after transplant, the treatment options are limited. This illustrates the need for new drugs and novel treatment strategies. This review will focus on the emerging role of histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACis) in patients with relapsed lymphoma. RECENT FINDINGS: Several HDACis have been evaluated in relapsed and refractory Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphoma showing promising activity in both. Specifically, vorinostat and romidepsin have been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for patients with relapsed or refractory cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Several other HDACis have shown very promising activity in Hodgkin lymphoma including panobinostat, entinostat and mocetinostat. SUMMARY: With the limited options available for lymphoma patients in the relapsed and refractory setting, the efficacy demonstrated by HDACis in this patient population is exciting and much needed and will hopefully prompt further investigation into additional agents and into the combination with HDACis."	20683267	"A. Copeland, D. Buglio and A. Younes"	MEDLINE2004	A review of depsipeptide and other histone deacetylase inhibitors in clinical trials	0	Current Pharmaceutical Design	"The histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDIs) are a new class of antineoplastic agents currently being evaluated in clinical trials. While these agents have been studied extensively in the laboratory, only recently has their mechanism of action begun to be elucidated. Several structural classes of compounds have been shown to exert histone deacetylase inhibition, including sodium n-butyrate, suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid, LAQ824, CI-994, MS-275, and depsipeptide. The HDIs have been shown to induce differentiation, to decrease cell proliferation, and to induce cell death. HDIs are thought to exert their anti-neoplastic effects by altering the expression of genes that play a role in the control of cell growth, and transformation. The HDIs have specific and well-defined effects on cancer cells. Preliminary results from clinical trials suggest that these agents are very promising. While there were sporadic case reports of activity using the early generation HDIs, dramatic responses have recently been observed in patients with T-cell lymphomas treated with depsipeptide, one of the newer agents. With the well-defined molecular effects on cancer cells, surrogate markers can be analyzed for evidence of activity and efficacy using either tumor samples or normal tissue. Presented in this review are details from clinical trials with both earlier and newer generations of HDIs. Toxicities specific to this class of agents are outlined and possibilities for rational combination therapies are discussed. [References: 105]"	15279609	R. Piekarz and S. Bates	MEDLINE2009	Romidepsin for the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma	0	Drugs of Today	"Aberrant epigenetic gene regulation by deacetylation of histone proteins has been involved in tumorigenesis. Histone deacetilase (HDAC) inhibitors are promising anticancer agents under research and development. Romidepsin is a novel and potent HDAC inhibitor highly efficient in inhibiting HDAC activity even at nanomolar concentrations. It exhibits a considerably stronger direct inhibition in class I HDAC enzymes as compared to class II. In addition of histone deacetylation, romidepsin modulates additional targets involved in cancer initiation and progression such as c-myc, Hsp90 and p53. Romidepsin has shown promising anticancer effects in a wide variety of nonclinical cancer models both in vitro and in vivo by induction of apoptosis, cell differentiation and cell cycle arrest. Romidepsin has been recently approved by the FDA for the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) patients who have received at least one prior systemic therapy. It is currently under clinical investigation for the treatment of other hematological malignances and solid tumors as monotherapy and in combination with other anticancer agents. Copyright 2009 Prous Science, S.A.U. or its licensors. All rights reserved. [References: 59]"	20126671	C. Campas-Moya	MEDLINE2005	Developing new drugs for the treatment of lymphoma	0	European Journal of Haematology	"Despite the great progress that has been made over the last several decades in the treatment of lymphoma, the prognosis for patients with relapsed disease, and particular sub-types of lymphoma like mantle cell and T cell lymphoma, remains quite poor. While major advances in the use of combination chemotherapy, monoclonal antibodies, peripheral blood stem cell transplants, and radioimmunotherapy, have provided new opportunities to alter the natural history of these diseases, and even improve cure rates among elected sub-populations of patients, these 'traditional' approaches have not benefited all patients, or subtypes of lymphoma. The incredibly rapid pace of understanding the molecular basis for the discrete sub-types of both non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and Hodgkin's Disease is beginning to afford exciting new opportunities to both risk stratify patients, and to identify potentially novel 'drugable' targets. These advancements in understanding the major molecular defects in lymphoma, have provided a new context in which we can rethink the use of new and old drugs, and design new ones with unique mechanisms of action. The panoply of new targets and drugs now becoming available for the treatment of lymphoma is truly daunting. A plethora of new small molecules that target bcl-2, mTOR, histone deactylases, and NF-kB have shown promising preclinical activity, and are now promising early phase activity. In many cases, the empirical observations from early clinical trials have provided invaluable clues to potentially valuable drugs like bortezomib, depsipeptide, and SAHA, These empirical observations, based on the inclusion of patients with lymphoma on these studies, have thus far proven to be as or more valuable than any other 'rational' target based approach. In addition, beyond the novel small molecules affecting unique and heretofore unrecognized biological pathways, there continues to be a robust and important effort to identify new derivatives of older generation drugs with hopefully better activity, and less toxicity. For example, new generation anthracenediones and anti-folates, and new formations of older drugs like doxorubicin, irinotecan, and vincristine afford new opportunities to favourably change the pharmacokinetic profile of these agents, and improve their overall safety profile. While it would not be possible to address each and every new such drug, we hope to touch on some of the major new themes and agents emerging for the treatment of Hodgkin's Disease and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. [References: 41]"	16007885	O. A. O'Connor	MEDLINE2011	Romidepsin: a novel histone deacetylase inhibitor for cancer	0	Expert Opinion on Investigational Drugs	"Introduction: Romidepsin is a novel histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, with a recent approval for treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL). HDAC inhibitors represent a novel approach to anti-tumor therapy. In contrast to traditional cytotoxic chemotherapy, HDAC inhibitors target underlying epigenetic changes leading to malignant transformation. Further study of romidepsin and similar agents in solid and hematologic malignancies is ongoing. Areas covered: This review discusses the development of romidepsin, its mechanism of action, pivotal clinical trials, drug toxicity and its recent approval for CTCL treatment. Key clinical trials covered include Phase I/II testing of romidepsin in solid and hematologic malignancies. In addition, the Phase II trial in CTCL leading to FDA approval of romidepsin is reviewed in detail. Literature search was performed using PubMed; keywords and concepts used included romidepsin, T-cell lymphoma and HDAC inhibitors. Expert opinion: Romidepsin is a potent HDAC inhibitor with demonstrable activity in T-cell lymphoma. In contrast to vorinostat, romidepsin is approved as second-line therapy. Current approval only includes CTCL; promising results have been demonstrated in Phase II testing of peripheral T-cell lymphoma subtypes. Future directions include expanded indications in T-cell lymphomas as well as novel combinations with other HDAC inhibitors and other therapeutic agents."	21699444	E. M. Bertino and G. A. Otterson	MEDLINE2010	Romidepsin: a new therapy for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma and a potential therapy for solid tumors	0	Expert Review of Anticancer Therapy	"Romidepsin is a histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDI), approved by the US FDA for the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL). Although various mechanisms have been proposed for the activity of HDIs, including induction of genes controlling cell cycle, acetylation of cytoplasmic proteins and direct induction of apoptosis, the mechanism underlying activity of romidepsin and other HDIs in CTCL is not known. Romidepsin induces long-lasting responses. The side-effect profile is similar to that of other HDIs, causing fatigue, nausea and thrombocytopenia. Management of the CTCL population requires vigilence to prevent infection with skin contaminants, and monitoring of potassium and magnesium, electrolytes found to be low in a large proportion of patients. Electrocardiographic (ECG) changes are common but are not associated with myocardial damage. When molecular end points were evaluated in 61 patients enrolled on a Phase II trial with romidepsin, response was associated with persistence of acetylated histone H3, suggesting that drug exposure is important in effective therapy with romidepsin. Future studies will endeavor to identify combination strategies to increase the efficacy both in resistant CTCL and in solid tumors and to identify biomarkers of response that will allow selection of patients most likely to benefit from the therapy."	20645688	"C. Grant, F. Rahman, R. Piekarz, C. Peer, R. Frye, R. W. Robey, E. R. Gardner, W. D. Figg and S. E. Bates"	MEDLINE2011	New drug therapies in peripheral T-cell lymphoma	0	Expert Review of Anticancer Therapy	"Peripheral T-cell lymphomas (PTCLs) are a heterogeneous collection of lymphomas that are associated with very poor prognosis. Conventional therapies, historically based on protocols for aggressive B-cell lymphomas, deliver less than adequate outcomes; the majority of patients experience early relapse after front-line treatment and current 5-year overall survival is only 10-30%. Clearly, new approaches are needed. In recent years there has been a plethora of novel agents showing activity in PTCL, often in patients with advanced relapsed or refractory disease. These agents include antifolate drugs (pralatrexate), histone deacetylase inhibitors (vorinostat, romidepsin, panobinostat and belinostat), nucleoside analogues (gemcitabine, forodesine and clofarabine), monoclonal antibodies (anti-CD52, anti-CD4 and anti-CD2), fusion toxins (denileukin diftitox), immunomodulatory agents (lenalidomide) and proteasome inhibitors (bortezomib). This is an exciting time in the treatment of PTCL, as our ever improving understanding of the distinguishing features, pathogenesis, molecular biology and progression of PTCL, and the knowledge of the mechanism and efficacy of novel therapies, may see a real improvement in outcomes for patients. The purpose of this article is to focus on these novel therapies and the results of recent clinical trials in PTCL."	21417858	R. A. Howman and H. M. Prince	MEDLINE2010	Emerging role of epigenetic therapies in cutaneous T-cell[NON-BREAKING SPACE] lymphomas	0	Expert Review of Hematology	"Cutaneous T-cell lymphomas (CTCLs) are rare lymphomas that arise primarily in the skin and are treated with skin-directed therapies in early-stage disease. Systemic therapy is indicated once skin-directed therapy is ineffective or for advanced-stage disease. CTCLs tend to be poorly responsive to chemotherapy and are incurable except for allogeneic stem cell transplantation. Recently, a new class of agents called histone deacetyalse inhibitors (HDACis) have shown remarkable activity in T-cell lymphomas in general and CTCLs in particular. Oral vorinostat and intravenous romidepsin are two HDACis that are now approved by the US FDA for use in patients with relapsed CTCLs. Several other HDACis are currently in clinical trials for CTCLs and other diseases and, although these agents vary by chemical structure and potency, the results of the ongoing clinical trials will eventually reveal if there are differences in clinical activity as well. The exact mechanism of action of these agents is unknown, but they are thought to affect the acetylation status of histones and other proteins in the cell and epigentically modulate transcription and other cellular activities. This leads to a myriad of downstream effects on cell cycle, apoptosis and differentiation. The following review summarizes the known biological mechanisms and clinical activity of various HDACis in the treatment of CTCLs and tries to define their role in the treatment paradigm of these unusual disorders."	21083462	"J. Zain, D. Kaminetzky and O. A. O'Connor"	MEDLINE2010	[Development of HDAC inhibitors]	0	Gan to Kagaku Ryoho [Japanese Journal of Cancer & Chemotherapy]	"In the mechanisms of carcinogenesis, it is becoming apparent that not only genetic abnormalities including DNA mutations, but also epigenetic abnormalities are heavily involved. Simultaneously, certain kinds of compounds indicated anti-tumor activity through their epigenetic effects. Typical drugs, which have the epigenetic effects, are histone deacetylase(HDAC) inhibitors. So far, two types of HDAC inhibitors, vorinostat and romidepsin, are approved by the Food Drug Administration for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma in the U. S. A. Not only these two compounds but also many HDAC inhibitors are under clinical trials in monotherapy and combination therapy. For a better outcome, it is very important to establish the appropriate biomarkers and appropriate combination based on mode-of-action for HDAC inhibitors, similar to other molecular-target antitumor drugs."	20841929	Y. Sowa	MEDLINE2009	Reactivation of DNA viruses in association with histone deacetylase inhibitor therapy: a case series report	0	Haematologica	"Histone deacetylase inhibitors are a class of anti-neoplastic agents that induce growth arrest, differentiation, and/or apoptotic cell death of transformed cells in vitro and in vivo. A phase II study exploring the efficacy of romidepsin, an histone deacetylase inhibitor, in patients with cutaneous or peripheral T-cell lymphomas was initiated at the National Cancer Institute. To date, over 120 patients with T-cell lymphoma have been treated on a multi-institutional phase II trial of romidepsin. Reactivation of latent DNA viruses including EBV, HBV, and VZV is well described as a consequence of the immune suppression associated with systemic chemotherapy. The incidence of viral reactivation in patients treated with histone deacetylase inhibitors is not yet known. We report the observation of EBV-associated illnesses in 2 patients and the reactivation of HBV in an additional patient treated with romidepsin. These cases may represent reactivation of DNA viruses due to histone deacetylase inhibitor induced immunosuppression, or direct promotion of viral replication via histone deacetylase inhibitor induced chromatin remodeling, or, alternatively, may be related to the underlying disease process. These observations suggest that vigilance for DNA virus reactivation is needed to quantify the risk in patients treated with histone deacetylase inhibitors."	19608677	"D. Ritchie, R. L. Piekarz, P. Blombery, L. J. Karai, S. Pittaluga, E. S. Jaffe, M. Raffeld, J. E. Janik, H. M. Prince and S. E. Bates"	MEDLINE2011	Degradable depsipeptide-based multiblock copolymers with polyester or polyetherester segments	0	International Journal of Artificial Organs	"Polydepsipeptides, alternating copolymers of an a-amino acid and a a-hydroxy acid, are an interesting group of degradable polymers. They have gained attention as potential degradable implant materials. Polydepsipeptides are expected to have better biocompatibility in vivo during the degradation process than aliphatic polyesters. Various depsipeptide-based polymers with or without pendant functional groups have been synthesized via ring-opening polymerization of corresponding morpholine-2,5-dione derivatives. The different polymer architectures of the polymers, for example, providing an alternating, random, diblock, triblock, or multiblock structure, can be obtained by appropriate selection of the polymerization reaction, which may be ring-opening or polyaddition. Recently, we synthesized thermoplastic phase-segregated copolymers with a multiblock structure containing polydepsipeptides and poly(e-caprolactone) or poly(p-dioxanone) segments via coupling of the respective diols using an aliphatic diisocyanate. The obtained multiblock copolymers showed good elastic properties at 25 degreesC and 75 degreesC. Furthermore, they exhibited a shape-memory capability. Here, we summarize the synthesis, biodegradation behavior and shape-memory properties of the multiblock copolymers. In addition, we introduce new combinations of depsipeptide/poly(ether)ester segments in multiblock copolymers. The depsipeptide-based multiblock copolymers have potential applications as biomaterials for controlled drug release, tissue engineering scaffolds, or base materials for biofunctional implants."	21374571	"Y. Feng, J. Lu, M. Behl and A. Lendlein"	MEDLINE2010	Enhanced growth inhibition by combined DNA methylation/HDAC inhibitors in lung tumor cells with silenced CDKN2A	0	International Journal of Oncology	"Aberrant hypermethylation at CpG sites within the CDKN2A gene is associated with silencing and has been proposed as a target for reactivation using both DNA methylation and histone deacetylation inhibitors. This study investigates the role of selecting tumor samples with a silenced as compared to deleted CDKN2A locus when assessing the efficacy of DNA methyltransferase inhibitor, zebularine, combined with the HDAC inhibitor, depsipeptide. Non-small cell lung cancer cell lines with defined CDKN2A status were analyzed by MTS assay to determine the effect of zebularine or zebularine combined with depsipeptide on tumor cell growth. We observed that zebularine treatment resulted in inhibition of cell growth in 11 out of 12 lung cancer cell lines with silenced CDKN2A, but no cell growth inhibition was detected in the 7 lung cancer cell lines tested with deleted CDKN2A (p>0.001). In addition, we found that the combination of 30 microM zebularine and 6 or 7 nM depsipeptide resulted in a synergistic inhibition of cell growth in tumor cells with silenced CDKN2A (p<0.001, CI=0.70 and 0.57, respectively) but not in tumor cells with deleted CDKN2A. In conclusion, tumor cells with methylated CDKN2A are more sensitive to zebularine than cell lines with deleted CDKN2A and the combination of zebularine/depsipeptide results in a synergistic effect on cell growth inhibition that is also linked with the presence of silenced CDKN2A. Thus, combination of DNA methyltransferase and HDAC inhibitors may be a potential treatment for lung cancer patients, but careful selection of patients will be needed to optimize the benefit of this regimen."	20811718	"M. Chen, D. Voeller, V. E. Marquez, F. J. Kaye, P. S. Steeg, G. Giaccone and M. Zajac-Kaye"	MEDLINE1992	Survey of conformational role of ester bonds in a cyclic depsipeptide. Study on cyclo(-L-Ala-L-Hmb-)2 by energy calculation and NMR spectroscopy	0	International Journal of Peptide & Protein Research	"The effect of ester bond on the conformation of peptide molecule was studied by designing and synthesizing a model tetradepsipeptide cyclo(-L-Ala-L-Hmb-)2 and by analyzing the conformation both theoretically and experimentally. Theoretical analysis showed that both ester and peptide bonds in the calculated low-energy conformations within 3 kcal/mol of the global minimum take a trans but distorted configuration. The distortion is larger in ester bonds than in peptide bonds. Further, the four carbonyls project from one side of the plane of the cyclic backbone, whereas the side chains project from the other side. These results are consistent with the experimental results obtained by NMR measurement; first, the coupling constant deduced from 1H-NMR species in DMSO-d6 is consistent with the dihedral angles of the calculated low-energy conformations; second, results of NOE measurement can reproduce the calculated configuration of the carbonyls and side chains. From the consistency between theoretical and experimental results, it is concluded that this model tetradepsipeptide takes an all-trans backbone conformation in solution and this backbone conformation is stabilized by large distortion in the ester bond, which compensates the strain resulted from the 12-membered cyclic backbone structure consisting only of L-residues."	1399269	"T. Kato, H. Mizuno, S. Lee, H. Aoyagi, H. Kodama and N. Go"	MEDLINE1992	Phase II trial of didemnin-B in advanced epithelial ovarian cancer. A Southwest Oncology Group study	0	Investigational New Drugs	"A Phase II study of Didemnin-B, a marine cyclic depsipeptide, was undertaken in patients with progressive epithelial ovarian cancer. The starting dose was 2.6 mg/m2. Fifteen patients received the drug, of whom twelve were evaluable. There were no responses observed in the twelve patients. The two most frequent toxicities were nausea and vomiting and anemia. On the basis of this trial, Didemnin-B is not felt to have significant effect with epithelial ovarian cancer."	1607250	"J. M. Cain, P. Y. Liu, D. E. Alberts, H. H. Gallion, L. Laufman, J. O'Sullivan, G. Weiss and J. N. Bickers"	MEDLINE1998	A phase II study of Didemnin B (NSC 325319) in advanced malignant melanoma: an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group study (PB687)	0	Investigational New Drugs	"PURPOSE: Didemnin B is a novel marine natural product cyclic depsipeptide containing unusual amino acid moieties. This agent demonstrates promising preclinical antitumor activity, including activity against B16 melanoma and against melanoma isolates in the human tumor stem cell assay. METHODS: We conducted a phase II study of Didemnin B, given in Cremophor, at a starting dose of 4.2 mg/m2/IV q 28 days. Patients with measurable metastatic or advanced malignant melanoma were eligible. All patients were previously untreated with chemotherapy and had performance status 0 or 1. Doses were escalated to 4.9 and 5.6 mg/m2 in cycles 2 and 3, respectively. RESULTS: Nineteen patients were entered and treated with a median of one cycle per patient. Eight of these patients went off study for toxicity including 7 with anaphylactoid reactions in the first or second cycle. One patient went off study after 3 cycles with severe myopathy, a newly described toxicity. Two were not evaluable for response and five were considered stable, including one patient with a transient PR of soft tissue disease in the first cycle. Another patient had stable disease for twelve cycles before progressing and one went off study electively after 3 cycles, for a total of 7 patients with stable disease. One patient with a measurable partial remission (PR) and went off study after three cycles due to severe myopathy, a then newly-described toxicity. No hematologic toxicity was seen. Nausea and vomiting were controlled with anti-emetics. CONCLUSIONS: This study was indeterminate with respect to the activity of Didemnin B in melanoma. Signs of activity were seen, particularly in soft tissue masses, though a large number of patients could not be evaluated fully for activity due to the occurrence of anaphylactoid reactions. This study does not preclude a clinically important level of activity for Didemnin B."	10360606	"H. Hochster, R. Oratz, D. S. Ettinger and E. Borden"	MEDLINE1992	Phase II study of didemnin B in advanced colorectal cancer	0	Investigational New Drugs	"Didemnin B is a depsipeptide derived from a Caribbean tunicate (sea squirt) that has demonstrated antineoplastic activity against a variety of murine tumor models, including the L1210 and P388 leukemia, the B16 melanoma, and M5076 sarcoma cell lines. Based on these data, we designed a phase II trial in which 15 patients with measurable, unresectable colorectal cancer were treated with Didemnin B at an initial dosage of 3.47 mg/m2 over 30 minutes administered by intravenous infusion every 28 days; the dosage was altered in accordance with the toxicity observed, with only one patient requiring a dosage reduction for pronounced nausea and vomiting. No hematologic or nonhematologic toxicity developed. No complete or partial responses were observed. These results do not compare favorably with results of treatments using other single agents or combinations that are currently available for the treatment of advanced colorectal cancers. However, because of the tolerable levels of toxicity experienced by in our patients, it is possible that an insufficient dose of the medication was delivered. We concluded that Didemnin B is not active against of colorectal cancers at the dosage and schedule at which it was administered in this study."	1428730	"D. V. Jones, Jr., J. A. Ajani, R. Blackburn, K. Daugherty, B. Levin, Y. Z. Patt and J. L. Abbruzzese"	MEDLINE1998	Phase I clinical study of didemnin B. A National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group study	0	Investigational New Drugs	"Didemnin B (NSC-325319), a new depsipeptide isolated from a Caribbean tunicate, has been evaluated in a clinical phase I study. The drug was administered in a schedule of a 4 weekly intravenous injection in a six-weeks cycle. Fifty-three patients received 71 evaluable cycles in an escalated dose ranging from 0.4 mg/m2/week to 2.5 mg/m2/week. No hematological toxicity was demonstrated at any dose level. Without prophylactic antiemetics nausea and vomiting was dose limiting at 1.2 mg/m2/week. Due to the use of Cremophor EL as a solvent, hypersensitivity reactions occurred in 9 patients. These reactions occurred following prior exposure to the drug and were commonly seen at the 3rd dose. They were not dose related but became more frequent at 1.5 mg/m2/week necessitating prophylactic treatment with H and H2 receptor blocking agents. Non-hematological toxicities included mild diarrhea, mucositis, anorexia, headaches, and local phlebitis. The dose- limiting toxicity was generalized weakness which became severe and disabling in 3 of 6 patients treated at 2.5 mg/m2/week. No objective responses were documented in 39 patients with evaluable disease. The recommended dose for phase II studies was 2.3 mg/m2/week x 4 in a 6-weeks cycle given with prophylactic antiemetics and H1 and H2 receptor blocking agents."	9740544	"J. A. Maroun, D. Stewart, S. Verma and E. Eisenhauer"	MEDLINE1994	Phase II clinical trial of didemnin B in previously treated small cell lung cancer	0	Investigational New Drugs	"Didemnin B (NSC 325319), a cyclic depsipeptide isolated from a Carribean sea tunicate, exhibited potent antitumor activity in preclinical studies. After determining the maximum tolerated dose in our previous phase I/II trial, we conducted a phase II study of this drug in patients with previously treated small cell lung cancer; the starting dose was 6.3 mg/m2 intravenously over 30 min every 28 days. The major side effects were in the neuromuscular system and included severe muscle weakness, myopathy and/or myotonia by electromyography, and elevation of creatine phosphokinase and aldolase levels. We also observed modest increases in bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase levels. There were minimal hematologic toxic effects. No response was observed among 15 evaluable patients, leading us to conclude that didemnin B was toxic but inactive in patients with previously treated small cell lung cancer at the stated dose and schedule. A review of the literature revealed no significant antitumor activity in cancers of the colon, breast, ovaries, cervix, or lung (non-small cell) or in renal cell carcinoma. Further clinical trials for didemnin B may not be warranted at the stated dose and schedule. [References: 24]"	7896544	"D. M. Shin, P. Y. Holoye, A. Forman, R. Winn, R. Perez-Soler, S. Dakhil, J. Rosenthal, M. N. Raber and W. K. Hong"	MEDLINE2001	"In vivo effects of a histone deacetylase inhibitor, FK228, on human acute promyelocytic leukemia in NOD / Shi-scid/scid mice"	0	Japanese Journal of Cancer Research	"Histone acetylation and deacetylation are closely linked to transcriptional activation and repression, respectively. In acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) have a synergistic effect with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) in vitro to induce differentiation. Here we report in vitro and in vivo effects of a HDACI, FK228 (formerly FR901228 or depsipeptide), on the human APL cell line NB4. FK228 had a strong and irreversible cytotoxicity compared with another HDACI, trichostatin A. In vivo administration of ATRA or FK228 alone partly inhibited the growth of established tumors of NB4 subcutaneously transplanted in NOD / Shi-scid / scid mice, and the combination was synergistically effective. Histopathological examination revealed that the combination induced apoptosis and differentiation as well as histone acetylation. Intravenous injection of NB4 in NOD / Shi-scid / scid mice followed by combination treatment significantly prevented leukemia death, whereas single administration did not. These findings suggest that FK228 is a promising agent to enhance ATRA-sensitivity in the treatment of APL."	11376562	"H. Kosugi, M. Ito, Y. Yamamoto, M. Towatari, R. Ueda, H. Saito and T. Naoe"	MEDLINE2000	"Apoptotic cytotoxic effects of a histone deacetylase inhibitor, FK228, on malignant lymphoid cells"	0	Japanese Journal of Cancer Research	"Histone deacetylases are promising targets for cancer treatment. Here we studied the in vitro effects of a potent histone deacetylase inhibitor, FK228 (formerly FR901228), on human leukemia / lymphoma cells and cell lines compared with normal hematopoietic cells. In a lymphoma cell line, Raji, a nanomolar concentration of FK228 induced G1 arrest and / or apoptotic cell death, depending on the concentration and exposure time. Growth of lymphoid cell lines including Raji (N = 13) was inhibited by 50% (IC(50)) after 2-day treatment at concentrations of 0.83 to 1.87 ng / ml. Viability of clinical samples from patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia was decreased by 50% at 0.78 +/- 0.46 ng / ml, whereas the IC(50) values for normal mononuclear cells from peripheral blood and bone marrow were 2.3 +/- 0.96 and 7.8 +/- 1.0 ng / ml, respectively. The IC(50) values for normal progenitor cells were 3.1, 4.4 and 7.8 ng / ml for BFU-E, CFU-GM and CFU-Mix, respectively. Expression levels of HDAC-1 and HDAC-3 proteins, which varied among cell lines, but were stable during the treatment with FK228, did not correlate with the sensitivity to FK288. This novel agent might be useful in the treatment of lymphoid malignancies, because the above concentrations are clinically achievable in vivo according to a recent clinical study."	11092981	"M. Murata, M. Towatari, H. Kosugi, M. Tanimoto, R. Ueda, H. Saito and T. Naoe"	MEDLINE2011	"Romidepsin (Istodax, NSC 630176, FR901228, FK228, depsipeptide): a natural product recently approved for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma"	0	Journal of Antibiotics	"Romidepsin (Istodax), a selective inhibitor of histone deacetylases (HDACs), was approved for the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma in November 2009 by the US Food and Drug Administration. This unique natural product was discovered from cultures of Chromobacterium violaceum, a Gram-negative bacterium isolated from a Japanese soil sample. This bicyclic compound acts as a prodrug, its disulfide bridge being reduced by glutathione on uptake into the cell, allowing the free thiol groups to interact with Zn ions in the active site of class I and II HDAC enzymes. Due to the synthetic complexity of the compound, as well as the low yield from the producing organism, analogs are sought to create synthetically accessible alternatives. As a T-cell lymphoma drug, romidepsin offers a valuable new treatment for diseases with few effective therapies."	21587264	"K. M. VanderMolen, W. McCulloch, C. J. Pearce and N. H. Oberlies"	MEDLINE1993	Mode of action of the cyclic depsipeptide antibiotic LL-AO341 beta 1 and partial characterization of a Staphylococcus aureus mutant resistant to the antibiotic	0	Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy	"The antibacterial activity of the cyclic antibiotic LL-AO341 beta 1 was examined. The antibiotic was a narrow spectrum agent, effective principally against Gram-positive organisms. The intrinsic insusceptibility of Escherichia coli was due to exclusion of the drug by the outer membrane. The antibiotic was bactericidal against Staphylococcus aureus, and cell death was associated with lysis of the bacteria. The antibiotic did not specifically inhibit the synthesis of DNA, RNA, protein, lipid or peptidoglycan since these synthetic activities continued for several minutes after exposure to lethal concentrations of the antibiotic and then all abruptly ceased between about 8 and 15 minutes post antibiotic exposure. These results are consistent with the cytoplasmic membrane being the primary target for LL-AO341 beta 1. Mutants of S. aureus 8325-4 selected on 10- or 20-times the MIC of LL-AO341 beta 1 occurred spontaneously with a frequency of about 3 x 10(-6). A mutant expressing a 160-fold increase in the MIC of LL-AO341 beta 1 was obtained by exposing cultures to progressively increasing concentrations of the antibiotic. This mutant displayed no cross-resistance to other agents apart from telomycin (a structural analogue of LL-AO341 beta 1), apparently did not modify or degrade LL-AO341 beta 1 and had only a slightly longer doubling time than the parent strain."	7511579	"B. Oliva, W. M. Maiese, M. Greenstein, D. B. Borders and I. Chopra"	MEDLINE1992	The VanS-VanR two-component regulatory system controls synthesis of depsipeptide peptidoglycan precursors in Enterococcus faecium BM4147	0	Journal of Bacteriology	"Plasmid pIP816 of Enterococcus faecium BM4147 confers inducible resistance to vancomycin and encodes the VanH dehydrogenase and the VanA ligase for synthesis of depsipeptide-containing peptidoglycan precursors which bind the antibiotic with reduced affinity. We have characterized a cluster of five genes of pIP816 sufficient for peptidoglycan synthesis in the presence of vancomycin. The distal part of the van cluster encodes VanH, VanA, and a third enzyme, VanX, all of which are necessary for resistance. Synthesis of these enzymes was regulated at the transcriptional level by the VanS-VanR two-component regulatory system encoded by the proximal part of the cluster. VanR was a transcriptional activator related to response regulators of the OmpR subclass. VanS stimulated VanR-dependent transcription and was related to membrane-associated histidine protein kinases which control the level of phosphorylation of response regulators. Analysis of transcriptional fusions with a reporter gene and RNA mapping indicated that the VanR-VanS two-component regulatory system activates a promoter used for cotranscription of the vanH, vanA, and vanX resistance genes."	1556077	"M. Arthur, C. Molinas and P. Courvalin"	MEDLINE1997	Pristinamycin I biosynthesis in Streptomyces pristinaespiralis: molecular characterization of the first two structural peptide synthetase genes	0	Journal of Bacteriology	"Two genes involved in the biosynthesis of the depsipeptide antibiotics pristinamycins I (PI) produced by Streptomyces pristinaespiralis were cloned and sequenced. The 1.7-kb snbA gene encodes a 3-hydroxypicolinic acid:AMP ligase, and the 7.7-kb snbC gene encodes PI synthetase 2, responsible for incorporating L-threonine and L-aminobutyric acid in the PI macrocycle. snbA and snbC, which encode the two first structural enzymes of PI synthesis, are not contiguous. Both genes are located in PI-specific transcriptional units, as disruption of one gene or the other led to PI-deficient strains producing normal levels of the polyunsaturated macrolactone antibiotic pristinamycin II, also produced by S. pristinaespiralis. Analysis of the deduced amino acid sequences showed that the SnbA protein is a member of the adenylate-forming enzyme superfamily and that the SnbC protein contains two amino acid-incorporating modules and a C-terminal epimerization domain. A model for the initiation of PI synthesis analogous to the established model of initiation of fatty acid synthesis is proposed."	9006024	"V. de Crecy-Lagard, V. Blanc, P. Gil, L. Naudin, S. Lorenzon, A. Famechon, N. Bamas-Jacques, J. Crouzet and D. Thibaut"	MEDLINE1994	GTP-dependent binding of the antiproliferative agent didemnin to elongation factor 1 alpha	0	Journal of Biological Chemistry	"The marine natural product, didemnin B, is a 7-amino acid, cyclic depsipeptide that inhibits G1 cell cycle progression at nanomolar concentrations by undefined mechanisms. It has been reported to exhibit immunosuppressive activities in animals and is undergoing clinical trials as a potential antineoplastic drug. In addition, at higher concentrations, didemnin B has been shown to inhibit in vivo and in vitro protein synthesis. However, the mechanisms by which inhibition is achieved are unknown. To investigate didemnin's various modes of action, an affinity column was synthesized and used to purify didemnin-binding proteins. The major retained protein was the 49-kDa guanine nucleotide-binding elongation factor, EF-1 alpha, which was identified by peptide sequence analysis. Moreover, didemnin binds EF-1 alpha only in the presence of GTP but does not inhibit the GTPase activity of EF-1 alpha. Therefore, EF-1 alpha is likely to be the intracellular target responsible for didemnin B's ability to inhibit protein synthesis. Furthermore, this specificity of didemnin affinity for the GTP-bound conformation of a guanine nucleotide-binding protein with homology to the Ras superfamily suggests a possible mode of action for didemnin's antiproliferative activity."	8195179	"C. M. Crews, J. L. Collins, W. S. Lane, M. L. Snapper and S. L. Schreiber"	MEDLINE1997	D-Alanyl-D-lactate and D-alanyl-D-alanine synthesis by D-alanyl-D-alanine ligase from vancomycin-resistant Leuconostoc mesenteroides. Effects of a phenylalanine 261 to tyrosine mutation	0	Journal of Biological Chemistry	"The Gram-positive bacterium Leuconostoc mesenteroides, ATCC 8293, is intrinsically resistant to the antibiotic vancomycin. This phenotype correlates with substitution of D-Ala-D-lactate (D-Ala-D-Lac) termini for D-Ala-D-Ala termini in peptidoglycan intermediates in which the depsipeptide has much lower affinity than the dipeptide for vancomycin binding. Overproduction of the L. mesenteroides D-Ala-D-Ala ligase (LmDdl) 2 in E. coli and its purification to approximately 90% homogeneity allow demonstration that the LmDdl2 does have both depsipeptide and dipeptide ligase activity. Recently, we reported that mutation of an active site tyrosine (Tyr), Tyr216, to phenylalanine (Phe) in the E. coli DdlB leads to gain of D-Ala-D-Lac depsipeptide ligase activity in that enzyme. The vancomycin-resistant LmDdl2 has a Phe at the equivalent site, Phe261. To test the prediction that a Tyr residue predicts dipeptide ligase while an Phe residue predicts both depsipeptide and dipeptide ligase activity, the F261Y mutant protein of LmDdl2 was constructed and purified to approximately 90% purity. F216Y LmDdl2 showed complete loss of the ability to couple D-Lac but retained D-Ala-D-Ala dipeptide ligase activity. The Tyr-->Phe substitution on the active site omega-loop in D-Ala-D-Ala ligases is thus a molecular indicator of both the ability to make D-Ala-D-Lac and intrinsic resistance to the vancomycin class of glycopeptide antibiotics."	9083053	I. S. Park and C. T. Walsh	MEDLINE1980	Sequence of active site peptides from the penicillin-sensitive D-alanine carboxypeptidase of Bacillus subtilis. Mechanism of penicillin action and sequence homology to beta-lactamases	0	Journal of Biological Chemistry	"It has been proposed that penicillin and other beta-lactam antibiotics are substrate analogs which inactivate certain essential enzymes of bacterial cell wall biosynthesis by acylating a catalytic site amino acid residue (Tipper, D.J., and Strominger, J.L. (1965) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 54, 1133-1141). A key prediction of this hypothesis, that the penicilloyl moiety and an acyl moiety derived from substrate both bind to the same active site residue, has been examined. D-Alanine carboxypeptidase, a penicillin-sensitive membrane enzyme, was purified from Bacillus subtilis and labeled covalently at the antibiotic binding site with [14C]penicillin G or with the cephalosporin [14C]cefoxitin. Alternatively, an acyl moiety derived from the depsipeptide substrate [14C]diacetyl L-Lys-D-Ala-D-lactate was trapped at the catalytic site in near-stoichiometric amounts by rapid denaturation of an acyl-enzyme intermediate. Radiolabeled peptides were purified from a pepsin digest of each of the 14C-labeled D-alanine carboxypeptidases and their amino acid sequences determined. Antibiotic- and substrate-labeled peptic peptides had the same sequence: Tyr-Ser-Lys-Asn-Ala-Asp-Lys-Arg-Leu-Pro-Ile-Ala-Ser-Met. Acyl moieties derived from antibiotic and from substrate were shown to be bound covalently in ester linkage to the identical amino acid residue, a serine at the penultimate position of the peptic peptide. These studies establish that beta-lactam antibiotics are indeed active site-directed acylating agents. Additional amino acid sequence data were obtained by isolating and sequencing [14C]penicilloyl peptides after digestion of [14C]penicilloyl D-alanine carboxypeptidase with either trypsin or cyanogen bromide and by NH2-terminal sequencing of the uncleaved protein. The sequence of the NH2-terminal 64 amino acids was thus determined and the active site serine then identified as residue 36. A computer search for homologous proteins indicated significant sequence homology between the active site of D-alanine carboxypeptidase and the NH2-terminal portion of beta-lactamases. Maximum homology was obtained when the active site serine of D-alanine carboxypeptidase was aligned correctly with a serine likely to be involved in beta-lactamase catalysis. These findings provide strong evidence that penicillin-sensitive D-alanine carboxypeptidases and penicillin-inactivating beta-lactamases are related evolutionarily."	6768745	D. J. Waxman and J. L. Strominger	MEDLINE1999	Synthesis and enzymatic degradation of optically active depsipeptide copolymers	0	"Journal of Biomaterials Science, Polymer Edition"	"This paper describes the synthesis and biodegradation of copolymers of cyclic depsipeptide with epsilon-caprolactone (CL) or lactide (LA). Optically active cyclic depsipeptides, 3,6-dimethyl-2,5-morpholinediones (DMOs), were prepared by the reaction of an amino acid (D-, L-, or DL-alanine) with a hydroxy acid derivative (DL-2-bromopropionyl bromide). These isomers are abbreviated as D-DMO, L-DMO and DL-DMO respectively, according to the names of alanine isomers. Then, we have prepared the copolymers of DMO isomers with CL using tin(II) octylate as a catalyst. The NMR spectra and thermal properties of DMO/CL copolymers revealed that these copolymers exist randomly. The enzymatic degradation of the copolymers has been examined using Rhizopus delemar lipase, cholesterol esterase (from Pseudomonas sp.), and Proteinase K (from Tritirachium album). Cholesterol esterase and Proteinase K show high degradability, while the lipase shows little degradation. Among the enzymes used, only Proteinase K could recognize the isomerism of DMO, resulting in the following order of degradability: copoly(L-DMO/CL) > copoly(DL-DMO/CL) > copoly(D-DMO/CL), i.e. this enzyme has the highest substrate specificity for naturally occurring L-alanine. Further, we have prepared the random copolymers of L-DMO with lactide (L-LA or DL-LA), and evaluated the enzymatic degradation of the copolymers by Proteinase K. The introduction of a small amount (up to c. 10 mol%) of L-DMO unit into LA homopolymers brought about greater degradability compared with LA homopolymers. In particular, L-DMO/L-LA copolymers with high degradability have been obtained without significant decrease in the mechanical and thermal properties of L-LA homopolymer."	10385224	"H. Shirahama, K. Umemoto and H. Yasuda"	MEDLINE1984	Enniatin B and valinomycin as ion carriers: an empirical force field analysis	0	Journal of Biomolecular Structure & Dynamics	"The alkali-ion binding properties of two natural depsipeptide ion carriers, enniatin B (EnB) and valinomycin (VM), are examined and compared by the empirical force field method. While VM has been shown to bind preferentially K+, Rb+, and Cs+ over Na+ in most solvents, EnB is considerably less specific. We find that EnB forms two kinds of complexes, internal and external. In internal complexes, the ion binds to all six carbonyl oxygens, while in external ones, only three oxygens, preferentially those of the D-hydroxy-isovaleryl residues, are bound. The size of the internal cavity is best suited for Na+, while K+ and Rb+ squeeze in asymmetrically by distorting the molecule, and Cs+ not at all. External binding is much less specific. Since internal complexes possess much higher strain energies than external ones, the latter may be at least as stable as the former, even in fairly non-polar solvents. VM is calculated to bind only internally, and with much less strain energy than EnB. The size of its internal cavity is well suited for binding the ions K+, Rb+, and Cs+, but is too big for Na+. The difference between the binding energies of Na+ and K+ is much smaller than that between the corresponding hydration enthalpies, thus explaining the binding preference for the latter ion."	6400917	"S. Lifson, C. E. Felder and A. Shanzer"	MEDLINE2011	"Grand rounds at the National Institutes of Health: HDAC inhibitors as radiation modifiers, from bench to clinic"	0	Journal of Cellular & Molecular Medicine	"Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and aggressive malignant brain tumour. Patients afflicted with this disease unfortunately have a very poor prognosis, and fewer than 5% of patients survive for 5 years from the time of diagnosis. Therefore, improved therapies to treat this disease are sorely needed. One such class of drugs that have generated great enthusiasm for the treatment of numerous malignancies, including GBM, is histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors. Pre-clinical data have demonstrated the efficacy of various HDAC inhibitors as anticancer agents, with the greatest effects shown when HDAC inhibitors are used in combination with other therapies. As a result of encouraging pre-clinical data, numerous HDAC inhibitors are under investigation in clinical trials, either as monotherapies or in conjunction with other treatments such as chemotherapy, biologic therapy or radiation therapy. In fact, two actively studied HDAC inhibitors, vorinostat and depsipeptide, were recently approved for the treatment of refractory cutaneous T cell lymphoma. In this review, we first present a patient with GBM, and then discuss the pathogenesis, epidemiology and current treatment options of GBM. Finally, we examine the translation of pre-clinical studies that have demonstrated HDAC inhibitors as potent radiosensitizers in in vitro and in vivo models, to a phase II clinical trial combining the HDAC inhibitor, valproic acid, along with temozolomide and radiation therapy for the treatment of GBM. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine Copyright 2011 Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd No claim to US government works."	21362133	"J. E. Shabason, P. J. Tofilon and K. Camphausen"	MEDLINE1998	Determination of the antitumor agent depsipeptide in plasma by liquid chromatography on serial octadecyl stationary phases	0	"Journal of Chromatography B, Biomedical Sciences & Applications"	"A high-performance liquid chromatographic assay has been developed and validated for the determination of the antitumor agent depsipeptide (FR-901228) in plasma samples from patients with advanced cancer. After the plasma proteins were precipitated with acetonitrile, the supernatant was extracted with ethylacetate. Depsipeptide was chromatographed on two serial octadecylsilica stationary phases using a mobile phase consisting of acetonitrile-potassium phosphate buffer (0.03 M, pH 3) (27:73, v/v), at a flow-rate of 2.0 ml/min and at ambient temperature. The method was linear over a 50 to 2000 ng/ml range and the intra- and inter-day coefficients of variations were less than 8%. The method was applied to the determination of the plasma concentration-time profile for 14 patients with advanced cancer receiving from 1 to 7.5 mg/m2 of depsipeptide per day as a continuous 4-h infusion."	9869377	"C. Chassaing, J. L. Marshall and I. W. Wainer"	MEDLINE1999	"Bioanalysis of thiocoraline, a new marine antitumoral depsipeptide, in plasma by high-performance liquid chromatography and fluorescence detection"	0	"Journal of Chromatography B, Biomedical Sciences & Applications"	"A sensitive bioanalytical assay for thicoraline, an investigational marine anticancer agent, in plasma, based on reversed-phase liquid chromatography and fluorescence detection, is reported. The proteins in the sample are precipitated by the addition of acetonitrile. After centrifugation, the supernatant is injected directly into the chromatograph. The analyte is quantified by fluorescence detection with excitation and emission at 365 and 540 nm, respectively. The method has been validated in the 1-100 ng/ml range, 1 ng/ml being the lower limit of quantification. Precision and accuracy both meet the current requirements for a bio-analytical assay and are <15% at 1 ng/ml and < or =5% in the 5-100 ng/ml range. Plasma samples can be stored for at least 4 months at -80 degrees C. Finally, the usefulness of this method for pharmacological research was shown in a pilot study of the pharmacokinetics of thiocoraline in rats."	10348193	"R. W. Sparidans, R. E. Henrar, J. M. Jimeno, G. Faircloth, P. Floriano and J. H. Beijnen"	MEDLINE2005	Targeting histones and proteasomes: new strategies for the treatment of lymphoma	0	Journal of Clinical Oncology	"Our ever-increasing understanding of cancer cell biology has begun to provide a variety of new, and potentially drugable targets for the treatment of many forms of cancer. Nowhere else is this more apparent than in the treatment of the lymphomas. A rapidly emerging experience in gene expression profiling has begun to suggest that we can define different subtypes of lymphoma on the basis of unique molecular signatures. These signatures can define important signaling pathways that may help account for the biology of different subsets of lymphoma, and are teaching us that the lymphomas are truly a heterogeneous set of diseases. What remains equally as interesting is the idea that empiric observations of novel targeted drugs in select subtypes of lymphoma can teach us much about the biology of different lymphomas. A priori assumptions about the anticipated activity of novel targeted agents in select subtypes of lymphoma have been turned upside down. Two pathways that have emerged recently as potentially important targets for new agents in lymphoma include the ubiquitin proteasome pathway and the biochemical reactions that control histone acetylation. New classes of drugs that affect these targets, such as bortezomib, depsipeptide, suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid, and a host of other compounds, though affecting a unique target in the cell, are associated with a remarkable panoply of different downstream biologic effects. In this article, we will review some of the prevailing theories about how these novel targeted drugs affect lymphoma biology, and how these compounds are changing the face of lymphoma therapy. [References: 60]"	16155030	O. A. O'Connor	MEDLINE2007	A comparison of available and investigational antibiotics for complicated skin infections and treatment-resistant Staphylococcus aureus and enterococcus	0	Journal of Drugs in Dermatology: JDD	"This article compares vancomycin, teicoplanin, quinupristin-dalfopristin, linezolid, daptomycin, tigecyline, dalbavancin, telavancin, ceftobiprole, oritavancin, and ramoplanin for the treatment of complicated skin and skin structure infections (cSSSI), methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), enterococcus, and vancomycin-resistant enterococcus. Vancomycin, a glycopeptide antibiotic, is administered intravenously, and is the mainstay of treatment for MRSA and cSSSI. While not available in the U.S., teicoplanin, another glycopeptide antibiotic, can be administered intramuscularly and has simpler dosing and monitoring requirements than vancomycin. Quinupristin/dalfopristin treats vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium (VREF) infections but inhibits cytochrome P450 A3P4, and has only modest activity against MRSA pneumonia. Daptomycin effectively treats cSSSI but not pneumonia caused by MRSA, and is effective against all strains of Staphylococcus. Linezolid, available orally and intravenously, is approved to treat community-acquired and nosocomial pneumonia, cSSSI, and infections caused by MRSA and vancomycin-resistant enterococci including infections with concurrent bacteraemia and VREE Tigecycline, a glycylcycline derived from minocycline, has been approved by the FDA to treat cSSSI and complicated intraabdominal infections, and might be effective against Acinetobacter baumannii; its primary side effect is digestive upset. Dalbavancin, effective against MRSA and administered intravenously once weekly, possesses coverage similar to vancomycin. Telavancin deploys multiple mechanisms of action and is effective against MRSA and Gram-positive bacteria resistant to vancomycin. Ceftobiprole, a cephalosporin effective against MRSA, has few side effects. Oritavancin demonstrates similar activity to vancomycin but possesses extended activity against vancomycin-resistant Staphylococcus and enterococci. Ramoplanin, a macrocyclic depsipeptide, is unstable in the bloodstream but can be taken orally to treat Clostridium difficile colitis. [References: 39]"	17373167	N. Scheinfeld	MEDLINE2010	Novel histone deacetylase inhibitors in clinical trials as anti-cancer agents	0	Journal of hematology & oncology	"Histone deacetylases (HDACs) can regulate expression of tumor suppressor genes and activities of transcriptional factors involved in both cancer initiation and progression through alteration of either DNA or the structural components of chromatin. Recently, the role of gene repression through modulation such as acetylation in cancer patients has been clinically validated with several inhibitors of HDACs. One of the HDAC inhibitors, vorinostat, has been approved by FDA for treating cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) for patients with progressive, persistent, or recurrent disease on or following two systemic therapies. Other inhibitors, for example, FK228, PXD101, PCI-24781, ITF2357, MGCD0103, MS-275, valproic acid and LBH589 have also demonstrated therapeutic potential as monotherapy or combination with other anti-tumor drugs in CTCL and other malignancies. At least 80 clinical trials are underway, testing more than eleven different HDAC inhibitory agents including both hematological and solid malignancies. This review focuses on recent development in clinical trials testing HDAC inhibitors as anti-tumor agents. [References: 145]"	20132536	"J. Tan, S. Cang, Y. Ma, R. L. Petrillo and D. Liu"	MEDLINE1996	Mechanisms of glycopeptide resistance in enterococci	0	Journal of Infection	"Inducible resistance to high levels of glycopeptide antibiotics in clinical isolates of enterococci is mediated by Tn1546 or related transposons. Tn1546 encodes the VanH dehydrogenase which reduces pyruvate to D-lactate (D-Lac) and the VanA ligase which catalyses synthesis of the depsipeptide D-alanyl-D-lactate (D-Ala-D-Lac). The depsipeptide replaces the dipeptide D-Ala-D-Ala leading to production of peptidoglycan precursors which bind glycopeptides with reduced affinity. In addition, Tn1546 encodes the VanX dipeptidase and the VanY D,D-carboxypeptidase that hydrolyse the dipeptide D-Ala-D-Ala and the C-terminal D-Ala residue of the cytoplasmic precursor UDP-MurNAC-L-Ala-gamma-D- Glu-L-Lys-D-Ala-D-Ala, respectively. These two proteins act in series to eliminate D-Ala-D-Ala-containing precursors. VanX is required for resistance whereas VanY only slightly increases the level of resistance mediated by VanH, VanA and VanX. [References: 20]"	8852545	"M. Arthur, P. E. Reynolds, F. Depardieu, S. Evers, S. Dutka-Malen, R. Quintiliani, Jr. and P. Courvalin"	MEDLINE2002	Quantitative analysis of the novel depsipeptide anticancer drug Kahalalide F in human plasma by high-performance liquid chromatography under basic conditions coupled to electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry	0	Journal of Mass Spectrometry	"Kahalalide F (KF) is a novel cyclic depsipeptide anticancer drug, which has shown anticancer activity both in vitro and in vivo especially against human prostate cancer cell lines. To characterize the pharmacokinetics of KF during a phase I clinical trial in patients with androgen refractory prostate cancer, a method was developed and validated for the quantitative analysis of KF in human plasma using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) coupled to positive electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS). Microbore reversed-phase liquid chromatography (LC) performed with mobile phases containing trifluoroacetic acid, an additive commonly used for separating peptides, resulted in substantial suppression of the signal for KF on ESI-MS/MS. An alternative approach employing a basic mobile phase provided an excellent response for KF when detected in the positive ion mode. Plasma samples were prepared for LC MS/MS by solid-phase extraction on C(18) cartridges. The LC separation was performed on a Zorbax Extend C(18) column (150 x 2.1 mm i.d., particle size 5 micro m) with acetonitrile -10 mM aqueous ammonia (85 : 15, v/v) as the mobile phase, at a flow-rate of 0.20 ml min(-1). A butyric acid analogue of KF was used as the internal standard. The lower limit of quantitation (LLQ) using a 500 micro l sample volume was 1 ng ml(-1) and the linear dynamic range extended to 1000 ng ml(-1). The inter-assay accuracy of the assay was -15.1% at the LLQ and between -2.68 and -9.05% for quality control solutions ranging in concentration from 2.24 to 715 ng ml(-1). The inter-assay precision was 9.91% or better at these concentrations. The analyte was stable in plasma under all relevant conditions evaluated and for a period of 16 h after reconstituting plasma extracts for LC analysis at ambient temperature. Copyright 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd."	12271442	"E. Stokvis, H. Rosing, L. Lopez-Lazaro, I. Rodriguez, J. M. Jimeno, J. G. Supko, J. H. M. Schellens and J. H. Beijnen"	MEDLINE1981	Inactivation of trypsin-like proteases by depsipeptides of p-guanidinobenzoic acid	0	Journal of Medicinal Chemistry	"A number of esters of p-guanidinobenzoic acid have been synthesized which contain a glycolyl peptide as the departing group. In the case of several enzymes such as trypsin and plasma kallikrein, depsipeptides were obtained which were considerably more reactive than the ethyl ester in inactivation of the protease by acyl-enzyme formation; the depsipeptide processing -CH2CO-Phe-NH2 as a leaving group displayed the highest reactivity. They were less effective in the case of urokinase, plasmin, and urinary kallikrein. Boar acrosin was very susceptible to inactivation by both ethyl and peptidyl esters. Depsipeptides possessing a longer peptide chain and a secondary carbon as a leaving group showed lower activities. The results demonstrate the productive use of the departing group region of protease active centers to obtain selectivity."	6454782	V. S. Ganu and E. Shaw	MEDLINE2008	Plitidepsin has a dual effect inhibiting cell cycle and inducing apoptosis via Rac1/c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase activation in human melanoma cells	0	Journal of Pharmacology & Experimental Therapeutics	"Melanoma is the most aggressive skin cancer and a serious health problem worldwide because of its increasing incidence and the lack of satisfactory chemotherapy for late stages of the disease. The marine depsipeptide Aplidin (plitidepsin) is an antitumoral agent under phase II clinical development against several neoplasias, including melanoma. We report that plitidepsin has a dual effect on the human SK-MEL-28 and UACC-257 melanoma cell lines; at low concentrations (</=45 nM), it inhibits the cell cycle by inducing G(1) and G(2)/M arrest, whereas at higher concentrations it induces apoptosis as assessed by poly-(ADP-ribose) polymerase cleavage and the appearance of a hypodiploid peak in flow cytometry analyses. Plitidepsin activates Rac1 GTPase and c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK). In addition, it induces AKT and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) phosphorylation. By using inhibitors, we found that JNK and p38 MAPK activation depends on Rac1 but not on phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), whereas AKT activation is independent of Rac1 but requires PI3K activity. Plitidepsin cytotoxicity diminishes by Rac1 inhibition or by the blockage of JNK and p38 MAPK using 4-(4-fluorophenyl)-2-(4-methylsulfinylphenyl)-5-(4-pyridyl)1H-imidazole (SB203580), but not by PI3K inhibition using wortmannin or 2-(4-morpholinyl)-8-phenyl-4H-1-benzopyran-4-one (LY294002). It is remarkable that plitidepsin and dacarbazine, the alkylating agent most active for treating metastatic melanoma, show a synergistic antiproliferative effect that was paralleled at the level of JNK activation. These results indicate that Rac1/JNK activation is critical for cell cycle arrest and apoptosis induction by plitidepsin in melanoma cells. They also support the combined use of plitidepsin and dacarbazine in in vivo studies."	18089842	"M. J. Munoz-Alonso, L. Gonzalez-Santiago, N. Zarich, T. Martinez, E. Alvarez, J. M. Rojas and A. Munoz"	MEDLINE2004	Differential expression of histone post-translational modifications in acute myeloid and chronic lymphocytic leukemia determined by high-pressure liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry	0	Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry	"The post-translational modification of the core histones is critical to the regulation of chromatin structure. Traditional methods for the determination of histone modification utilize immunoassay techniques to determine the extent and site of post-translational modification. These methods, though sensitive, require site-specific antibodies. This manuscript describes the application of reverse-phase high-pressure liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry (LC-MS) to analyze global modification levels of core histones. The method is fast, sensitive, and easily automated. Furthermore, the technique gives the global patterns of modification for all four core histones in a single experiment. The LC-MS method was optimized using histones extracted from bovine thymus. These methods were then applied to the characterization of changes in histone modification in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell lines treated with histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors. Dose-dependent changes in the distribution of modified core histones were observed. These results were validated in primary leukemia cells from patients with refractory or relapsed AML or chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) treated on a Phase I clinical trial of the HDAC inhibitor depsipeptide. An increase in the relative abundance of specific acetylated forms of histone H4 was readily observable in these patients at intervals of 4 and 24 h after treatment."	14698558	"L. Zhang, M. A. Freitas, J. Wickham, M. R. Parthun, M. I. Klisovic, G. Marcucci and J. C. Byrd"	MEDLINE2003	Enhancement of depsipeptide-mediated apoptosis of lung or esophageal cancer cells by flavopiridol: activation of the mitochondria-dependent death-signaling pathway	0	Journal of Thoracic & Cardiovascular Surgery	"OBJECTIVE: Treating cancer cells with depsipeptide, a novel antitumor agent currently in a phase II clinical trial, causes potent upregulation of p21/WAF1 expression and cell arrest at G1 and G2 checkpoints. p21/WAF1 upregulation, however, impedes the ability of depsipeptide to induce significant apoptosis. This study was designed to determine whether flavopiridol, a synthetic cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor known to inhibit p21 expression in tumor cells, could enhance depsipeptide-mediated apoptosis in cultured lung and esophageal cancer cells. METHODS: Lung or esophageal cancer cells were exposed to depsipeptide, flavopiridol, or a combination of depsipeptide and flavopiridol. Cytotoxicity and apoptosis were quantitated by means of (4,5-dimethylthiazo-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide and terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTP nick end labeling-based assays, respectively. Cytosolic cytochrome c levels, caspase 9 activity, mitochondrial membrane depolarization, and dependence of apoptosis on caspase 9 in treated cells were studied to determine the role of the mitochondria in mediating apoptosis induced by this drug combination. RESULTS: Flavopiridol completely abolished depsipeptide-mediated dose-dependent upregulation of p21/WAF1 expression. Combining flavopiridol with depsipeptide resulted in a 3- to 8-fold reduction of depsipeptide inhibitory concentration of 50% values that was closely paralleled by synergistic enhancement of apoptosis (4- to 10-fold higher than levels of cell death induced by either drug alone) in all cancer cell lines. The essential role of mitochondria in mediating cell death was indicated by robust translocation of cytochrome c from the mitochondria into the cytosol, 2.5- to 5-fold activation of caspase 9, severe disruption of mitochondrial inner membrane potential, and complete inhibition of apoptosis by the selective caspase 9 inhibitor. More important, this drug combination was not toxic to primary normal epithelial cells derived from the airway or skin. CONCLUSION: The depsipeptide plus flavopiridol combination exhibits powerful and selective cytocidal activity against cancer but not normal cells. Apoptosis induced by this combination is mediated by the mitochondria-dependent death pathway."	12771887	"D. M. Nguyen, W. D. Schrump, W. S. Tsai, A. Chen, J. H. t. Stewart, F. Steiner and D. S. Schrump"	MEDLINE2007	Will broad-spectrum histone deacetylase inhibitors be superseded by more specific compounds?	0	Leukemia	"Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors can induce differentiation, cell cycle and growth arrest or in certain cases apoptosis in cancer cells. In a remarkably short period of time, especially considering that their mechanism of action remains largely undefined, HDAC inhibitors have realized both success and failure as therapeutics for cancer in clinical trials. Notably, the pleiotropic HDAC inhibitors, suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) and depsipeptide, have shown efficacy in a wide range of cancers, in particular for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL), and are progressing in phase II clinical studies. However, evidence is accumulating that specific HDAC enzymes are important with respect to clinical efficacy, calling the usefulness of the classical inhibitors into question. Class I enzymes are being heralded as the most clinically relevant, however, this is still controversial and much of the information is in the private domain. Nevertheless, the potential to alter the expression of a more focused, disease-related subset of genes and to limit adverse effects has prompted the development of isoform-specific HDAC inhibitors. Here, we consider the growing view that broad-spectrum HDAC inhibitors may be superseded by more specific compounds. [References: 68]"	17109024	T. C. Karagiannis and A. El-Osta	MEDLINE2003	"Preclinical evaluation of antineoplastic activity of inhibitors of DNA methylation (5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine) and histone deacetylation (trichostatin A, depsipeptide) in combination against myeloid leukemic cells"	0	Leukemia Research	"During the development of leukemia, genes that suppress growth and induce differentiation can be silenced by aberrant DNA methylation and by changes in chromatin structure that involve histone deacetylation. It has been reported that a positive interaction between DNA methylation and histone deacetylation takes place to inhibit transcription. Based on this observation, our working hypothesis was that a combination of inhibitors of these processes should produce an enhancement of their antineoplastic activity on leukemic cells. The cytosine nucleoside analog, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5AZA), is a potent inhibitor of DNA methylation, which can activate tumor suppressor genes in leukemic cells that have been silenced by aberrant methylation. In clinical trials, 5AZA was demonstrated to be an active antileukemic agent. Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDI) can also activate gene expression in leukemic cell lines by producing changes in chromatin configuration, and show antineoplastic activity in preclinical studies. In this report, we investigated the in vitro antineoplastic activity of 5AZA, alone and in combination with the HDI, trichostatin A (TSA) and depsipeptide (FR901228, depsi), on the human myeloid leukemic cell lines, HL-60 and KG1a. The results showed that the combination of 5AZA with TSA or depsi produced a greater inhibition of growth and DNA synthesis and a greater loss of clonogenicity than either agent alone. These results suggest that 5AZA used in combination with HDI may be an interesting chemotherapeutic regimen to investigate in patients with acute myeloid leukemia that is resistant to conventional chemotherapy."	12620295	"S. Shaker, M. Bernstein, L. F. Momparler and R. L. Momparler"	MEDLINE2010	Progress in depsipeptide-based biomaterials	0	Macromolecular Bioscience	"Polydepsipeptides - alternating copolymers of an alpha-amino acid and an alpha-hydroxy acid - are a group of biodegradable polymers. Versatile polydepsipeptides with or without pendant functional groups, as well as various polymer architectures, for example, providing alternative, random, diblock, triblock, multiblock or graft sequence structures, can be synthesized via ring-opening copolymerization of various morpholine-2,5-dione derivatives. They are potential candidates for a wide range of biomedical applications. Polydepsipeptides are described in this review from the aspect of materials science, especially as biomaterials. We mainly focus on various techniques developed to synthesize polydepsipeptides and their copolymers, biodegradation behaviors, shape-memory properties and possible biomedical applications."	20602421	"Y. Feng, J. Lu, M. Behl and A. Lendlein"	MEDLINE1974	Polydepsipeptides. III. Theoretical conformational analysis of randomly coiling and ordered depsipeptide chains	0	Macromolecules		4418847	R. T. Ingwall and M. Goodman	2011	Plitidepsin has a safe cardiac profile: a comprehensive analysis	0	Marine Drugs	"Plitidepsin is a cyclic depsipeptide of marine origin in clinical development in cancer patients. Previously, some depsipeptides have been linked to increased cardiac toxicity. Clinical databases were searched for cardiac adverse events (CAEs) that occurred in clinical trials with the single-agent plitidepsin. Demographic, clinical and pharmacological variables were explored by univariate and multivariate logistic regression analysis. Forty-six of 578 treated patients (8.0%) had at least one CAE (11 patients (1.9%) with plitidepsin-related CAEs), none with fatal outcome as a direct consequence. The more frequent CAEs were rhythm abnormalities (n = 31; 5.4%), mostly atrial fibrillation/flutter (n = 15; 2.6%). Of note, life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias did not occur. Myocardial injury events (n = 17; 3.0%) included possible ischemic-related and non-ischemic events. Other events (miscellaneous, n = 6; 1.0%) were not related to plitidepsin. Significant associations were found with prostate or pancreas cancer primary diagnosis (p = 0.0017), known baseline cardiac risk factors (p = 0.0072), myalgia present at baseline (p = 0.0140), hemoglobin levels lower than 10 g/dL (p = 0.0208) and grade >=2 hypokalemia (p = 0.0095). Treatment-related variables (plitidepsin dose, number of cycles, schedule and/or total cumulative dose) were not associated. Electrocardiograms performed before and after plitidepsin administration (n = 136) detected no relevant effect on QTc interval. None of the pharmacokinetic parameters analyzed had a significant impact on the probability of developing a CAE. In conclusion, the most frequent CAE type was atrial fibrillation/atrial flutter, although its frequency was not different to that reported in the age-matched healthy population, while other CAEs types were rare. No dose-cumulative pattern was observed, and no treatment-related variables were associated with CAEs. Relevant risk factors identified were related to the patient's condition and/or to disease-related characteristics rather than to drug exposure. Therefore, the current analysis supports a safe cardiac risk profile for single-agent plitidepsin in cancer patients."	21747745	"A. Soto-Matos, S. Szyldergemajn, S. Extremera, B. Miguel-Lillo, V. Alfaro, C. Coronado, P. Lardelli, E. Roy, C. S. Corrado and C. Kahatt"	MEDLINE2005	Depsipeptide inhibits migration of primary and metastatic uveal melanoma cell lines in vitro: a potential strategy for uveal melanoma	0	Melanoma Research	"Uveal melanoma (UM) is a highly malignant primary intraocular tumour in adults that has a high mortality rate due to haematogenous dissemination. The migration of UM cells through the basement membrane requires the presence of proteolytic enzymes, such as matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). The expression of MMP-2, MMP-9 and membrane type-1/MMP (MT-1/MMP) in UM cells is a known risk factor for metastatic disease. We tested the effect of depsipeptide (DP) on UM cell migration and the level and activity of MMP-2, MMP-9, MT-1/MMP and tissue inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases 1 and 2 (TIMP-1 and TIMP-2). Three primary and two metastatic (liver metastasis) UM cell lines were treated with DP (0, 1, 5 and 10 nmol/l) for 24 h. Migration of UM cells was studied in modified Boyden migration chambers for 24 h and only viable cells on both sides of the membrane were counted. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) were used to quantify the level of MMP-2, MMP-9, MT-1/MMP, TIMP-1 and TIMP-2 after the cells had been exposed to DP (0, 1, 5 and 10 nmol/l) for 24 h. In addition, the activities of MMP-2, MMP-9 and MT-1/MMP were determined after DP treatment. A dose-dependent decrease in the migration of viable UM cells was observed for primary and metastatic cell lines (30-50% inhibition). We detected a dose-dependent: (1) decrease in the protein level of MMP-2, MMP-9 and MT-1/MMP; (2) decrease in the activity of MMP-2, MMP-9 and MT-1/MMP; and (3) increase in the protein level of TIMP-1 and TIMP-2. It can be concluded that DP is a potent inhibitor of primary and metastatic UM cell migration in vitro. Our data suggest that this inhibition is mediated by the downregulation of MMPs and the upregulation of TIMPs. DP may be a valuable adjunctive treatment modality for primary and metastatic UM in humans."	15917695	"D. D. Klisovic, M. I. Klisovic, D. Effron, S. Liu, G. Marcucci and S. E. Katz"	MEDLINE2007	Gateways to clinical trials	0	Methods & Findings in Experimental & Clinical Pharmacology	"Agomelatine, AGRO-100, AIDSVAX gp120 B/E, alfimeprase, aliskiren fumarate, ALVAC vCP1452, alvocidib hydrochloride, ambrisentan, AME-527, AN-0128, apadenoson, ARRY-142886, asenapine maleate, axitinib, azimilide hydrochloride; Belimumab, bevacizumab, biolimus A9, BiovaxID, bryostatin 1; Cannabidiol, celgosivir, CG-1940/CG-8711, CKD-501, collagen-PVP, CpG-10101, CTL-102, CTL-102/CB-1954; D-4F, darusentan, dexverapamil, DNA influenza vaccine, dronabinol/cannabidiol, dronedarone hydrochloride; Eculizumab, edodekin alfa, edotecarin, enzastaurin hydrochloride; Fingolimod hydrochloride; Golimumab; HBV-DNA vaccine, hyaluronic acid; I-131 ch-TNT-1/B, imatinib mesylate, inhaled insulin, ipilimumab, ispinesib mesylate, i.v. gamma-globulin; KU-59436; Lapaquistat; Mapatumumab, MC-1, MC-1/lisinopril, mepolizumab; Nibentan, nilotinib, Nobori, NV1FGF; Ocrelizumab; Paclimer, pagoclone, paliperidone, PC-515, PHA-794428, phosphostim, PPI-2458, prasugrel, PTC-299; Renzapride hydrochloride, Reolysin, reslizumab, revaprazan hydrochloride, rivaroxaban, romidepsin, rubitecan, ruboxistaurin mesilate hydrate; Sapacitabine, SarCNU, ST-1859, sunitinib malate; Tanespimycin, temsirolimus, tgAAC-94, TGN-255, ticagrelor, tipifarnib, tolvaptan, tretazicar, TRU-015; Upgrade varicella vaccine, Ushercell; Vernakalant hydrochloride, verpasep caltespen, VNP-40101M, VRC-HIVADV014-00-VP, VRC-HIVDNA009-00-VP, VX-001; XL-647, XL-820, XL-880, XL-999. Copyright 2007 Prous Science."	17440629	M. Bayes	MEDLINE2004	Gateways to clinical trials	0	Methods & Findings in Experimental & Clinical Pharmacology	"Gateways to Clinical Trials is a guide to the most recent clinical trials in current literature and congresses. The data in the following tables has been retrieved from the Clinical Studies Knowledge Area of Prous Science Integrity, the drug discovery and development portal, http://integrity.prous.com. This issue focuses on the following selection of drugs: 101M; Adalimumab, adefovir dipivoxil, adenosine triphosphate, albumin interferon alfa, alefacept, alemtuzumab, aminolevulinic acid hexyl ester, autologous renal tumor vaccine, azimilide hydrochloride; Bortezomib, bosentan, BR-1; C340, cantuzumab mertansine, caspofungin acetate, CGP-36742, CHAMPION everolimus-eluting coronary stent, cypher; Dalbavancin, darbepoetin alfa, desloratadine, duloxetine hydrochloride, dutasteride; Efalizumab, emtricitabine, enfuvirtide, erlosamide, ertapenem sodium, everolimus, ezetimibe; Flesinoxan hydrochloride, fosamprenavir calcium, FR-901228, frovatriptan; Gadofosveset sodium, gadomer-17, galiximab, gamma-hydroxybutyrate sodium, gefitinib; HuOKT3gamma1(Ala234-Ala235); IDN-6556, imatinib mesylate, iodine (I131) tositumomab, iseganan hydrochloride, ixabepilone; Keratinocyte growth factor; LB-80380, levocetirizine, liposomal doxorubicin, LMB-9, lopinavir, lopinavir/ritonavir, lumiracoxib, lurtotecan; Mecasermin, midostaurin, morphine hydrochloride; Natalizumab, nelfinavir, nesiritide, niacin/lovastatin; Olcegepant, omalizumab, oregovomab; Parecoxib sodium, PEG-filgrastim, peginterferon alfa-2a, peginterferon alfa-2b, peginterferon alfa-2b/ ribavirin, perospirone hydrochloride, pexelizumab, pimecrolimus, prinomastat; Resiquimod, rhIGFBP-3, rhIGF-I/rhIGFBP-3, ritanserin, ro-31-7453, rosuvastatin calcium; SCIO-469, SDZ-SID-791, SU-11248, suberanilohydroxamic acid; Tadalafil, taxus, telithromycin, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, TER-286, tezosentan disodium, TH-9507, tipifarnib, tipranavir, tolvaptan, tramadol hydrochloride/acetaminophen, travoprost, treprostinil sodium, tucaresol; Valganciclovir hydrochloride, val-mCyd, vardenafil hydrochloride hydrate, vinflunine, voriconazole; Ximelagatran, XTL-002; Yttrium 90 (90Y) ibritumomab tiuxetan."	15319815	"M. Bayes, X. Rabasseda and J. R. Prous"	MEDLINE2004	Gateways to clinical trials	0	Methods & Findings in Experimental & Clinical Pharmacology	"Gateways to Clinical Trials is a guide to the most recent clinical trials in current literature and congresses. The data in the following tables has been retrieved from the Clinical Studies Knowledge Area of Prous Science Integrity(R), the drug discovery and development portal, http://integrity.prous.com. This issue focuses on the following selection of drugs: Activated protein C concentrate, Ad-CD154, Adeno-Interferon gamma, alemtuzumab, APC-8024, 9-aminocamptothecin, aprepitant, l-arginine hydrochloride, aripiprazole, arsenic trioxide, asimadoline; O6-Benzylguanine, bevacizumab, Bi-20, binodenoson, biphasic insulin aspart, bivatuzumab, 186Re-bivatuzumab, BMS-181176, bosentan, botulinum toxin type B, BQ-123, bryostatin 1; Carboxy- amidotriazole, caspofungin acetate, CB-1954, CC-4047, CDP-860, cerivastatin sodium, clevidipine, CTL-102; 3,4-DAP, darbepoetin alfa, decitabine, desloratadine, DHA-paclitaxel, duloxetine hydrochloride; Efalizumab, EGF vaccine, eletriptan, eniluracil, ENMD-0997, eplerenone, eplivanserin, erlosamide, ertapenem sodium, escitalopram oxalate, esomeprazole magnesium, eszopiclone, everolimus, exatecan mesilate, exenatide, ezetimibe; Fondaparinux sodium, FR-901228, FTY-720; Gefitinib, gemtuzumab ozogamicin, gepirone hydrochloride; Hexyl insulin M2, human insulin; Imatinib mesylate, insulin detemir, insulin glargine, iodine (I131) tositumomab, ISV-205, ivabradine hydrochloride, ixabepilone; Levetiracetam, levocetirizine, linezolid, liposomal NDDP, lonafarnib, lopinavir, LY-156735; Mafosfamide cyclohexylamine salt, magnesium sulfate, maxacalcitol, meclinertant, melagatran, melatonin, MENT, mepolizumab, micafungin sodium, midostaurin, motexafin gadolinium; Nesiritide, NS-1209, NSC-601316, NSC-683864; Osanetant; Palonosetron hydrochloride, parecoxib sodium, pegaptanib sodium, peginterferon alfa-2a, peginterferon alfa-2b, pegylated OB protein, pemetrexed disodium, perillyl alcohol, picoplatin, pimecrolimus, pixantrone maleate, plevitrexed, polyglutamate paclitaxel, posurdex, pramlintide acetate, prasterone, pregabalin; Rasburicase, rimonabant hydrochloride, rostaporfin, rosuvastatin calcium; SDZ-SID-791, sibrotuzumab, sorafenib, SU-11248; Tadalafil, targinine, tegaserod maleate, telithromycin, TheraCIM, tigecycline, tiotropium bromide, tipifarnib, tirapazamine, treprostinil sodium; Valdecoxib, Valganciclovir hydrochloride, Vardenafil hydrochloride hydrate; Ximelagatran; Zofenopril calcium, Zoledronic acid monohydrate."	15071612	"M. Bayes, X. Rabasseda and J. R. Prous"	MEDLINE2006	Gateways to clinical trials	0	Methods & Findings in Experimental & Clinical Pharmacology	"Gateways to Clinical Trials are a guide to the most recent clinical trials in current literature and congresses. The data in the following tables have been retrieved from the Clinical Trials Knowledge Area of Prous Science Integrity, the drug discovery and development portal, http://integrity.prous.com. This issue focuses on the following selection of drugs: 5-Methyltetrahydrofolate, 9-aminocamptothecin; AdPEDF.11, AE-37, albumin interferon alfa, alicaforsen sodium, alvocidib hydrochloride, AMG-706, arginine butyrate, avanafil, axitinib, azimilide hydrochloride; BAY-579352, belagenpumatucel-L, beta-lapachone, BHT-3009, BIBW-2992, bremelanotide, BX-471; Casopitant mesylate, cediranib, certolizumab pegol, CH-1504, ChimeriVax-West Nile, clofazimine, CpG-7909, curcumin, Cypher; Dapoxetine hydrochloride, darusentan, diflomotecan, D-methionine, dnaJP1, D-serine, DTPw-HB Hib-MenAC, DTPw-HepB-Hib; E-7010, ecogramostim, edodekin alfa, EGFRvlll peptide vaccine, elcometrine, elcometrine/ethinylestradiol, elsilimomab, enrasentan, ertumaxomab, etalocib sodium, exisulind; Fenretinide, fesoterodine, fingolimod hydrochloride, fontolizumab; Gefitinib, gemtuzumab ozogamicin, ghrelin (human), GV-1001; HTU-PA, human papillomavirus vaccine; Indacaterol, indiplon, interleukin-21, intranasal insulin, irinotecan hydrochloride/floxuridine, ISIS-301012, ispinesib mesylate, ixabepilone; K562/GM-CSF; Lapatinib, L-BLP-25, linezolid, liposome encapsulated paclitaxel, LY-2124275; MC-1, MC-1/lisinopril, MDX-066, melanoma vaccine, MMR-V, multivalent (ACYW) meningitis vaccine; Nilotinib, nobori, nociceptin; Oblimersen sodium, orbofiban acetate, ospemifene; Paliperidone, panitumumab, PEG-filgrastim, PEGylated interferon alfacon-1, perflubutane, pertuzumab, phenserine tartrate, phVEGF-A165, pleconaril, prasugrel, prednisolone sodium metasulfobenzoate; R-411, recombinant malaria vaccine, rhGM-CSF, roflumilast, romidepsin, ruboxistaurin mesilate hydrate; Sirolimus-eluting stent, SR-4554, St. John's Wort extract; Talabostat, Taxus, TGN-255, tifacogin, tiotropium bromide, tolevamer sodium, trabectedin, tretinoin LF; Vatalanib succinate; Yellow fever vaccine, YM-155. (c) 2006 Prous Science. All rights reserved."	17235418	"M. Bayes, X. Rabasseda and J. R. Prous"	MEDLINE2006	Gateways to clinical trials	0	Methods & Findings in Experimental & Clinical Pharmacology	"Gateways to Clinical Trials are a guide to the most recent clinical trials in current literature and congresses. The data in the following tables have been retrieved from the Clinical Trials Knowledge Area of Prous Science Integrity, the drug discovery and development portal, http://integrity.prous.com. This issue focuses on the following selection of drugs: ABT-510, adalimumab, alefacept, alemtuzumab, AMG-531, anakinra, armodafinil, asenapine maleate, atazanavir sulfate, atorvastatin; Bortezomib, bosentan; CEB-1555, cetuximab, ciclesonide, clodronate, CT-011; Darifenacin hydrobromide, desloratadine; E-7010, ecallantide, eculizumab, efalizumab, eltrombopag, erlotinib hydrochloride, eslicarbazepine acetate, eszopiclone, ezetimibe; Febuxostat, fosamprenavir calcium, fulvestrant; Gefitinib, genistein; Haemophilus influenzae B vaccine, human papillomavirus vaccine; Imatinib mesylate, insulin glargine; Lenalidomide, liposomal cisplatin; MAb G250, mapatumumab, midostaurin, MP4, mycophenolic acid sodium salt; Natalizumab, neridronic acid, NSC-330507; Oblimersen sodium, ofatumumab, omalizumab, oral insulin, oregovomab; Paliperidone, parathyroid hormone (human recombinant), peginterferon alfa-2a, peginterferon alfa-2b, peginterferon alfa-2b/ribavirin, pegylated arginine deiminase 20000, pemetrexed disodium, pimecrolimus, pitavastatin, pneumococcal 7-valent conjugate vaccine, prasterone, pregabalin, pumosetrag hydrochloride; Recombinant malaria vaccine, retigabine, rivaroxaban, Ro-26-9228, romidepsin, rosuvastatin calcium, rotavirus vaccine; SGN-30, sitaxsentan sodium, solifenacin succinate, sorafenib, sunitinib malate; Tadalafil, tegaserod maleate, temsirolimus, TER-199, tifacogin, tiludronic acid, tiotropium bromide; Vildagliptin, VNP-40101M, vorinostat; YM-150, yttrium 90 (90Y) ibritumomab tiuxetan; Zanolimumab, zoledronic acid monohydrate. Copyright 2006 Prous Science"	16810345	"M. Bayes, X. Rabasseda and J. R. Prous"	MEDLINE2007	Gateways to clinical trials	0	Methods & Findings in Experimental & Clinical Pharmacology	"Gateways to Clinical Trials are a guide to the most recent clinical trials in current literature and congresses. The data the following tables have been retrieved from the Clinical Trials Knowledge Area of Prous Science Integrity, the drug discovery and development portal, http://integrity.prous.com. This issues focuses on the following selection of drugs: (-)-Epigallocatechin gallate, 101M, AAV-AADC, AGN-201904-Z; Agomelatine, AN-0128, AN-2690, Arginine butyrate, Asenapine maleate; Belinostat, Bortezomib, BQ-123, BQ-788; Bucindolol hydrochloride; Certolizumab pegol; Dasatinib, Denosumab, Desvenlafaxine succinate; Ecogramostim, Esomeprazole magnesium; Homoharringtonine; huN901-DM1, Hyaluronic acid; Incyclinide; L-Arginine hydrochloride; Mepolizumab; Nematode anticoagulant protein c2, Nilotinib; Oblimersen sodium; R-115866, Raltegravir potassium, Retapamulin, Romidepsin, Rusalatide acetate; Sarcosine, SCIO-469, Soblidotin, Sorivudine; Tilarginine hydrochloride, Tipifarnib; Uracil; Vildagliptin. (c) 2007 Prous Science. All rights reserved."	17609744	"M. Bayes, X. Rabasseda and J. R. Prous"	MEDLINE2007	Gateways to clinical trials	0	Methods & Findings in Experimental & Clinical Pharmacology	"Gateways to Clinical Trials are a guide to the most recent clinical trials in current literature and congresses. The data the following tables have been retrieved from the Clinical Trials Knowledge Area of Prous Science Integrity, the drug discovery and development portal, http://integrity.prous.com. This issues focuses on the following selection of drugs: 4'-Thio-ara-C, 5-methyltetrahydrofolate; ABT-089, AD-237, AF-37702, alvocidib hydrochloride, apricitabine, armodafinil, atrasentan, AVE-5883, avian influenza vaccine, azimilide hydrochloride; Banoxantrone, BIBF-1120; CD34+ cells, certolizumab pegol, CHIR-258, cilansetron, CoFactor, CX-3543, cystemustine; D-003, dexloxiglumide, DMXB-anabaseine; Ecogramostim, elcometrine, elcometrine/ethinylestradiol, etravirine; Fenretinide, fingolimod hydrochloride, fospropofol disodium; Gaboxadol, gestodene, glutamine; Human insulin, hyaluronic acid; Incyclinide, indacaterol, ispronicline, istradefylline; Labradimil, lamifiban, lapatinib, L-arginine hydrochloride, liposomal cisplatin, liposome encapsulated paclitaxel, LY-517717; Manidipine hydrochloride/delapril hydrochloride, maraviroc, MBP(82-98), MD-0727, MDX-214, melanotan I, MMR vaccine; Nacystelyn, nalfurafine hydrochloride, nibentan, nilotinib, NK-105; OBI-1, oblimersen sodium, olmesartan medoxomil, olmesartan medoxomil/hydrochlorothiazide, oregovomab; Pexelizumab, PG-116800, PG-CPT, PHA-794428, prasugrel; RC-3095, rDNA insulin, RFB4(dsFv)-PE38, rhEndostatin, rhenium Re-186 etidronate, rhGM-CSF, roflumilast, romidepsin; Sarcosine, SGLU1, SGN-40, succinobucol; TAU, teduglutide, telatinib, tesofensine, tipifarnib, tirapazamine, TKA-731, tolvaptan, trabectedin; Vaccimel, vatalanib succinate, velafermin, vildagliptin, vinflunine; XP-19986; YM-155. (c) 2007 Prous Science. All rights reserved."	17344945	"M. Bayes, X. Rabasseda and J. R. Prous"	MEDLINE2008	Gateways to clinical trials	0	Methods & Findings in Experimental & Clinical Pharmacology	"Gateways to clinical trials is a guide to the most recent trials in current literature and congresses. The data in the following tables has been retrieved from the Clinical Trials Knowledge Area of Prous Science Integrity(R), the drug discovery and development portal, http://integrity.prous.com. This issue focuses on the following selection of drugs: (+)-Dapoxetine hydrochloride, (S)-Tenatoprazole sodium salt monohydrate 19-28z, Acotiamide hydrochloride hydrate, ADV-TK, AE-37, Aflibercept, Albinterferon alfa-2b, Aliskiren fumarate, Asenapine maleate, Axitinib; Bavituximab, Becatecarin, beta-1,3/1,6-Glucan, Bevacizumab, Bremelanotide; Calcipotriol/betamethasone dipropionate, Casopitant mesylate, Catumaxomab, CDX-110, Cediranib, CMD-193, Cositecan; Darinaparsin, Denosumab, DP-b99, Duloxetine hydrochloride; E75, Ecogramostim, Elacytarabine, EMD-273063, EndoTAG-1, Enzastaurin hydrochloride, Eplerenone, Eribulin mesilate, Esomeprazole magnesium, Etravirine, Everolimus, Ezetimibe; Faropenem daloxate, Febuxostat, Fenretinide; Ghrelin (human); I-131 ch-TNT-1/B, I-131-3F8, Iclaprim, Iguratimod, Iloperidone, Imatinib mesylate, Inalimarev/Falimarev, Indacaterol, Ipilimumab, Iratumumab, Ispinesib mesylate, Ixabepilone; Lapatinib ditosylate, Laquinimod sodium, Larotaxel dehydrate, Linezolid, LOR-2040; Mapatumumab, MKC-1, Motesanib diphosphate, Mycophenolic acid sodium salt; NK-012; Olanzapine pamoate, Oncolytic HSV, Ortataxel; Paclitaxel nanoparticles, Paclitaxel poliglumex, Paliperidone palmitate, Panitumumab, Patupilone, PCV-9, Pegfilgrastim, Peginterferon alfa-2a, Peginterferon alfa-2b, Pertuzumab, Picoplatin, Pimavanserin tartrate, Pimecrolimus, Plerixafor hydrochloride, PM-02734, Poly I:CLC, PR1, Prasugrel, Pregabalin, Progesterone caproate, Prucalopride, Pumosetrag hydrochloride; RAV-12, RB-006, RB-007, Recombinant human erythropoietin alfa, Rimonabant, Romidepsin; SAR-109659, Satraplatin, Sodium butyrate; Tadalafil, Talampanel, Tanespimycin, Tarenflurbil, Tariquidar, Taurine, Tecovirimat, Telatinib, Telavancin hydrochloride, Telcagepant, Terameprocol, Tesofensine, Tetrodotoxin, Tezampanel, Tipifarnib, TPI-287, Tremelimumab; Valspodar, Vatalanib succinate, VCL-CB01, vCP1452, Vorinostat; XL-228; Ziprasidone hydrochloride. Copyright 2008 Prous Science, S.A.U. or its licensors. All rights reserved."	19088949	A. Tomillero and M. A. Moral	MEDLINE2008	Gateways to clinical trials. July-August 2008	0	Methods & Findings in Experimental & Clinical Pharmacology	"(-)-Epigallocatechin gallate, 501516, 89-12; Abatacept, Adalimumab, Adefovir dipivoxil, AG-701, Agatolimod sodium, Alefacept, Aliskiren fumarate, Apixaban, Atazanavir sulfate, Atrasentan, Axitinib; BI-1744-CL, BIBF-1120, BIBW-2992, Bortezomib; Carboxyamidotriazole, Caspofungin acetate, CBP-501, Cediranib, Ceftobiprole, Certolizumab pegol, Cetuximab, Cholesteryl hydrophobized polysaccharide-Her2 protein complex, CHP-NY-ESO-1, Cypher; Dalbavancin, Dalcetrapib, Daptomycin, Darapladib, Deferasirox, Deforolimus, Denosumab, DNA-HIV-C, Dovitinib, DR-5001, Dronedarone hydrochloride, DT388IL3; E75, EC-17/EC-90, Ecogramostim, Efungumab, Entecavir, EP HIV-1090, EP-2101, Everolimus, Ezetimibe, Ezetimibe/simvastatin; Faropenem daloxate, Fluticasone furoate, Fondaparinux sodium, Fospropofol disodium, Fulvestrant; Golimumab, GSK-089, GW-590735; HO/03/03, hTERT572, hTERT572Y; Iloperidone; Immunoglobulin intravenous (human), Ispinesib mesylate, Istradefylline, Ixabepilone; JR-031, JX-594; KLH; Laropiprant, Lecozotan hydrochloride, Lenalidomide, Lestaurtinib, Linezolid; MGCD-0103, MK-0646, MVA-BN Measles; NI-0401, Niacin/laropiprant, NSC-719239, NYVAC-C; Ospemifene; Paliperidone palmitate, PAN-811, PCV7, Pegfilgrastim, Peginterferon alfa-2a, PEGirinotecan, Perifosine, Pertuzumab, PF-00299804, Picoplatin, Pimavanserin tartrate, Pitavastatin calcium, Pomalidomide, Prasterone, Pratosartan, Prucalopride, PSMA27/pDOM, Pyridoxal phosphate; QS-21, Quercetin; Rebimastat, Rimonabant, Rolofylline, Romidepsin, Rosuvastatin calcium, RTS,S/SBAS2; SCH-530348, SN-29244, Soblidotin, Sodium dichloroacetate, Solifenacin succinate, Sorafenib, Spheramine, SU-6668, Succinobucol; Taranabant, Taxus, Telaprevir, Telavancin hydrochloride, Telbivudine, Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, Tigecycline, Tiotropium bromide, Tocilizumab, Triphendiol; UC-781, Udenafil, UNIL-025; V-5 Immunitor, Valsartan/amlodipine besylate, Varenicline tartrate, Velafermin, Vernakalant hydrochloride, Vinflunine, Vitespen, Vorinostat, VX-001; Xience V, XRP-0038; Yttrium Y90 Epratuzumab; Z-360, Ziconotide, Ziprasidone hydrochloride, Zotarolimus, Zotarolimus-eluting stent. Copyright 2008 Prous Science, S.A.U. or its licensors. All rights reserved."	18850047	A. Tomillero and M. A. Moral	MEDLINE2008	Gateways to clinical trials	0	Methods & Findings in Experimental & Clinical Pharmacology	"11D10, 9vPnC-MnCc; Adalimumab, Adefovir dipivoxil, Alefacept, ALN-RSV01, AME-133, AMG-317, Aminolevulinic acid methyl ester, Amlodipine besylate/atorvastatin calcium, Anisodamine, Anti-IL-5 receptor antibody, Apremilast, Aripiprazole, Atacicept, Atazanavir sulfate, Atrasentan; Banoxantrone, Bevacizumab, BIBW-2992, Binodenoson, BMS-387032; cAC10, Caldaret hydrate, CD-NP, Ceftobiprole medocaril, Celivarone fumarate, Certolizumab pegol, Cholesteryl hydrophobized polysaccharide-Her2 protein complex, Choline fenofibrate, Cilengitide, Cinaciguat, Curcumin, Custirsen sodium, Cypher, CYT-6091; Dalcetrapib, Deforolimus, Desvenlafaxine succinate, DHA-paclitaxel, DP6-001; E-7010, E75, Ecogramostim, EGF-P64K, EnvPro, Enzastaurin hydrochloride, Escitalopram oxalate, Ezetimibe, Ezetimibe/simvastatin; Fenretinide; Gefitinib, Golimumab, Green tea catechins, GTI-2040, GW-406381; HPV16 E6 E7, HPV-16/18 AS04, HPV-6/11/16/18; ICC-1132, Immune globulin intravenous (human), Indacaterol, Intranasal insulin; Kahalalide F; Lactobacillus rhamnosus, Laromustine, Laropiprant, GTI-2040; MAb 3H1, Mepolizumab, Mifamurtide, Milataxel, MP4; Nebicapone, Nelarabine, Neuradiab; Oncolytic HSV; PCV7, PHX-1149, Pimecrolimus, Pralatrexate, Pramiconazole; Ranibizumab, Reolysin, Rilonacept, Rolofylline, Romidepsin; S-32865, Shigella dysenteriae 1 vaccine; Taranabant, Taxus, TZP-101; Ustekinumab; Vitespen; Zileuton, Zycure. Copyright 2008 Prous Science, S.A.U. or its licensors. All rights reserved."	18773127	A. Tomillero and M. A. Moral	MEDLINE2009	Gateways to clinical trials	0	Methods & Findings in Experimental & Clinical Pharmacology	"Abacavir sulfate/lamivudine, Adalimumab, AdCD40L, Adefovir, Adefovir dipivoxil, Ambrisentan, Amlodipine, Amlodipine besylate/olmesartan medoxomil, AN-2728, Apixaban, Aripiprazole, Armodafinil, Atazanavir sulfate, Atomoxetine hydrochloride, Atrasentan, Azacitidine, Bevacizumab, Blinatumomab, Bortezomib, Bosentan, Carfilzomib, Caspofungin acetate, Cediranib, Cetuximab, Choriogonadotropin alfa, Clevudine, Clindamycin phosphate/benzoyl peroxide, Clofarabine, Daidzeol, Darunavir, Dasatinib, Decitabine, Deferasirox, Deforolimus, Degarelix acetate, Denenicokin, Dexlansoprazole, Duloxetine hydrochloride, Elacytarabine, Enfuvirtide, Enoxaparin, Entecavir, Eribulin mesilate, Erlotinib hydrochloride, Escitalopram oxalate, Eslicarbazepine acetate, Eszopiclone, Etravirine, Ezetimibe/simvastatin, Forodesine hydrochloride, Fosamprenavir calcium, Gefitinib, Gemtuzumab ozogamicin, Golimumab, Imatinib mesylate, Imetelstat, Insulin gl'argine, Insulin glulisine, Interferon alfa-2b XL, Ivabradine hydrochloride, Lacosamide, Lenalidomide, Lintuzumab, Liposomal adriamycin, Liposomal belotecan, Liposome-encapsulated fentanyl, Lopinavir/ritonavir, Lutropin alfa, LY-207320, Maraviroc, Mecasermin, MKC-253, MP-470, NGR-TNF, Nilotinib hydrochloride monohydrate, Ofatumumab, Olmesartan medoxomil, Omacetaxine mepesuccinate, PAN-811, Panobinostat, Pegfilgrastim, Peginterferon alfa-2a, Peginterferon alfa-2b, Peginterferon alfa-2b/ribavirin, Pemetrexed disodium, Perospirone hydrochloride, PF-734200, Phentermine/topiramate, Pimecrolimus, Pitavastatin calcium, Plerixafor hydrochloride, Pregabalin, Raltegravir potassium, Ramelteon, Ranibizumab, Recombinant Bet V1, Recombinant human insulin, Regadenoson, rhITF, Romidepsin, Rosuvastatin calcium, Ruboxistaurin hydrochloride, Rufinamide, Sapropterin dihydrochloride Saracatinib, SB-73, SC-599, Seliciclib, Sirolimus-eluting stent, Sorafenib, Sunitinib malate, Tadalafil, Tanespimycin, Tapentadol hydrochloride, Tegaserod maleate, Telbivudine, Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate/emtricitabine, Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate/emtricitabine/efavirenz, Ticlopidine hydrochloride, Tigecycline, TST-10088, Tularemia vaccine, Valsartan/amlodipine besylate, Vandetanib, Vardenafil hydrochloride hydrate, Vincristine, Vorinostat, Yttrium 90 (90Y) ibritumomab tiuxetan. Copyright 2009 Prous Science, S.A.U. or its licensors. All rights reserved."	20094643	A. Tomillero and M. A. Moral	MEDLINE2009	Gateways to clinical trials	0	Methods & Findings in Experimental & Clinical Pharmacology	"(+)-Dapoxetine hydrochloride, [(123)I]-BZA, 9-Aminocamptothecin; Abacavir sulfate/lamivudine, Adalimumab, Adefovir dipivoxil, Alemtuzumab, Alvocidib hydrochloride, Ambrisentan, Amsilarotene, Anacetrapib, Anakinra, Apricitabine, Aripiprazole, Arsenic trioxide, Atazanavir sulfate, Atazanavir/ritonavir, Atrasentan, Azacitidine; Banoxantrone, Bazedoxifene acetate, Bevacizumab, Bexarotene, Biphasic insulin aspart, Bortezomib, Bosentan, Bromfenac; Cachectin, Calcipotriol/betamethasone dipropionate, Canakinumab, Carfilzomib, CAT-354, CCX-282, Certolizumab pegol, Cetuximab, Choline fenofibrate, Clevudine, Clofarabine, CNTO-328, Corifollitropin alfa, Crofelemer; Daptomycin, Darbepoetin alfa, Darunavir, Dasatinib, Decitabine, Deferasirox, Denosumab, Duloxetine hydrochloride, Dutasteride; Emtricitabine, Enfuvirtide, Entecavir, Epoetin zeta, Erlotinib hydrochloride, Escitalopram oxalate, Eslicarbazepine acetate, Eszopiclone, Etravirine, Everolimus, Exenatide, Ezetimibe, Ezetimibe/simvastatin; Farglitazar, Febuxostat, Fosamprenavir calcium, FX-06; Gabapentin enacarbil, Gefitinib; HIVIS DNA; Imatinib mesylate, INCB- 18424, Indacaterol, Inotuzumab ozogamicin, Insulin detemir; JNJ-26854165; Lacosamide, Landiolol, Laromustine, Lenalidomide, Liposomal doxorubicin, L-NAME, Lopinavir, Lopinavir/ritonavir, Lumiracoxib; Maraviroc, Mepolizumab, Methoxy polyethylene glycol- epoetin-beta, Miglustat, MK-0493, MVA-CMDR, Mycophenolic acid sodium salt; Natalizumab, Nepafenac, Neratinib, Neridronic acid, Nesiritide, Nilotinib hydrochloride monohydrate; Olmesartan medoxomil, Omacetaxine mepesuccinate, Omalizumab; Paclitaxel poliglumex, Palifermin, Patupilone, Pegfilgrastim, Peginterferon alfa-2a, Peginterferon alfa-2b, Peginterferon alfa-2b/ ribavirin, Pemetrexed disodium, PHA-848125, Pitavastatin calcium, Posaconazole, Povidone-iodine liposome complex, Prasugrel, Pregabalin, Prucalopride; Raltegravir potassium, Retigabine, Revaprazan hydrochloride, rhFSH, Rilpivirine, Rivaroxaban, Romidepsin, Rosuvastatin calcium, RWJ-676070; SAR-109659, Sitagliptin phosphate monohydrate, Sorafenib, Stavudine/Lamivudine/Nevirapine, Sunitinib malate; Tadalafil, Telaprevir, Telbivudine, Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate/emtricitabine, Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate/emtricitabine/efavirenz, Teriparatide, Tigecycline, Tiotropium bromide, Tipifarnib, Tipranavir, Tocilizumab, Trifluridine/TPI; UP-780; Vandetanib, Vardenafil hydrochloride hydrate, Vatalanib succinate, Vitespen, Vorinostat; Yttrium 90 (90Y) ibritumomab tiuxetan; Zoledronic acid monohydrate. Copyright 2009 Prous Science, S.A.U. or its licensors. All rights reserved."	19536362	A. Tomillero and M. A. Moral	MEDLINE2010	Gateways to clinical trials	0	Methods & Findings in Experimental & Clinical Pharmacology	"[11C]RAC; (18)F-Fluoromisonidazole; 89-12; 9-[18F]Fluoropropyl-(+)-dihydrotetrabenazine; Adalimumab, Adecatumumab, ADMVA, ADXS-11-001, Aflibercept, Agatolimod sodium, AGS-004, Alglucosidase alfa, Aliskiren fumarate, Alvocidib hydrochloride, AMG-108, AMG-853, Apixaban, Aripiprazole, Armodafinil, Atazanavir sulfate, Atomoxetine hydrochloride; Bevacizumab, BioMatrix Flex drug eluting stent, Biphasic insulin aspart, Bortezomib, Bosentan; Caspofungin acetate, Cediranib, Cetuximab, ChimeriVax-Dengue, Choriogonadotropin alfa, Cinacalcet hydrochloride, Cizolirtine citrate, Clofarabine, Cocaine conjugate vaccine, CX-717; Darbepoetin alfa, Dasatinib, Decitabine, Denosumab, Desvenlafaxine succinate, Dexamethasone sodium phosphate, Dienogest, Diphencyprone, Doripenem, DTaP-HepB-IPV, Dutasteride; E-7010, Ecallantide, Ecstasy, Eicosapentaenoic acid/docosahexaenoic acid, Emtricitabine, Enfuvirtide, Erlotinib hydrochloride, Eszopiclone, Etonogestrel/ethinyl estradiol, Etoricoxib, Everolimus, Everolimus-eluting coronary stent EVT-201, Ezetimibe, Ezetimibe/simvastatin; Ferumoxytol, Fesoterodine fumavate, Figitumumab, Filgrastim, Fingolimod hydrochloride, Fluticasone furoate, Fluval P, Fluzone, Fondaparinux sodium, Fulvestrant, Fungichromin; Gamma-hydroxybutyrate sodium, Gefitinib, GHB-01L1, GLY-230, GSK-1349572; Hib-MenCY-TT, Hib-TT, HPV-6/11/16/18, Hydrocodone bitartrate; IC-51, Icatibant acetate, Imatinib mesylate, Immunoglobulin intravenous (human), Indetanib, Influenza A (H1N1) 2009 Monovalent Vaccine, Inhalable human insulin, Insulin glargine, Insulin glulisine, Interferon-beta, Ispinesib mesylate, Ixabepilone; Laromustine, Latanoprost/timolol maleate, L-Citrulline, Lenalidomide, Lexatumumab, Linezolid, Lopinavir/ritonavir, Lutropin alfa; Mapatumumab, MDX-066, MDX-1388, Mepolizumab, Methoxy polyethylene glycol-epoetin-beta, Metreleptin, Micafungin sodium, Mometasone furoate/oxymetazoline hydrochloride, Mx-dnG1, Mycophenolic acid sodium salt; Nabiximols, Natalizumab, Nemonoxacin, Norelgestromin/ethinyl estradiol; Oblimersen sodium, Ocriplasmin, Olmesartan medoxomil, Omacetaxine mepesuccinate; Paclitaxel-eluting stent, Pagoclone, Paliperidone, Panitumumab, Pazopanib hydrochloride, PCV7, Pegaptanib octasodium, Peginterferon alfa-2a, Peginterferon alfa-2b/ ribavirin, Pegvisomant, Pemetrexed disodium, Perifosine, Pimecrolimus, Pitavastatin calcium, Plerixafor hydrochloride, Plitidepsin, Posaconazole, Pregabalin, Progesterone capriate; Raltegravir potassium, Ramucirumab, Ranelic acid distrontium salt, Rasburicase, Recombinant Bet V1, Recombinant human insulin, rhFSH, Rolofylline, Romidepsin, Romiplostim, Rosuvastatin calcium; Sapacitabine, Sevelamer carbonate, Sinecatechins, Sirolimus-eluting stent, Sitagliptin phosphate monohydrate, SN-29244, Sorafenib, Sugammadex sodium, Sunitinib malate; Tadalafil, Tafenoquine, Talnetant, Tanezumab, Tapentadol hydrochloride, Tasocitinib citrate, Technosphere/Insulin, Telcagepant, Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, Teriparatide, Ticagrelor, Tigecycline, Tiotropium bromide, Tipifarnib, Tocilizumab, TS-041; Ulipristal acetate, Urtoxazumab, Ustekinumab; Vandetanib, Varenicline tartrate, Vicriviroc, Voriconazole, Vorinostat, VRC-HIVADV014-00-VP, VRC-HIVDNA016-00-VP; Zoledronic acid monohydrate. Copyright 2010 Prous Science, S.A.U. or its licensors. All rights reserved."	20664824	A. Tomillero and M. A. Moral	MEDLINE2007	Depsipeptide (FK228) as a novel histone deacetylase inhibitor: mechanism of action and anticancer activity	0	Mini-Reviews in Medicinal Chemistry	"Depsipeptide (FK228), a new histone deacetylase inhibitor, has been recently introduced into clinical trials. This agent shows interesting metabolic properties, novel mechanism of action, and is undergoing phase I-II clinical studies in hematopoietic malignancies and solid tumors. Mechanism of action, pharmacokinetics and anticancer activity of depsipeptide is the subject of this review. [References: 77]"	17979809	"E. Lech-Maranda, E. Robak, A. Korycka and T. Robak"	MEDLINE2008	Reduced expression of DNA topoisomerase I in SF295 human glioblastoma cells selected for resistance to homocamptothecin and diflomotecan	0	Molecular Pharmacology	"Homocamptothecins (hCPTs) are a novel class of topoisomerase I (Top1) inhibitors with enhanced chemical stability compared with the currently used camptothecin (CPT) analogs irinotecan and topotecan. The hCPT derivative diflomotecan (BN80915) is currently in clinical trials. We established two resistant human glioblastoma cell lines, SF295/hCPT50 and SF295/BN50, by stepwise exposure of the parental SF295 line to increasing concentrations of hCPT and BN80915, respectively. The two resistant cell lines were 15- to 22-fold resistant to hCPT and BN80915 as well as 7- to 27-fold cross-resistant to other Top1 inhibitors, including CPT, topotecan, and the indenoisoquinolines MJ-III-65 (NSC 706744) and NSC 724998, but sensitive to the topoisomerase II inhibitors mitoxantrone and etoposide. Neither of the resistant cell lines displayed any detectable expression of the three major drug transporters P-glycoprotien, multidrug resistance-associated protein 1, or ATP-binding cassette, subfamily G (WHITE), member 2, as assessed by immunoblot or flow cytometry. Reduced expression of Top1 protein occurred at the transcriptional level in both of the resistant cell lines, consistent with the reduction of Top1 enzyme level as the major contribution to the resistance phenotype in SF295/hCPT50 and SF295/BN50 cells. Treatment of the resistant cell lines with the histone deacetylase inhibitor depsipeptide or the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine alone or concomitantly did not result in re-expression of Top1. Our studies suggest that selection for resistance to hCPT or BN80915 is primarily related to reduced Top1 expression at the transcriptional level, resulting in reduced enzyme levels."	17984197	"Z. Liao, R. W. Robey, J. Guirouilh-Barbat, K. K. W. To, O. Polgar, S. E. Bates and Y. Pommier"	MEDLINE2004	Histone deacetylase inhibitors: development as cancer therapy	0	Novartis Foundation Symposium	"Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors represent a new class of targeted anticancer agents. A number of structural classes of HDAC inhibitors have been developed of which several are in clinical trials, including phenylbutyrate (PB) and related compounds; the hydroxamic acids, suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) and depsipeptide (FK-228); and the benzamides, MS-275 and C1-994. This review will focus on our studies with the hydroxamic acid HDAC inhibitors, of which SAHA is the lead agent. X-ray crystallographic studies with a HDAC homologue (HDLP) demonstrated that the hydroxamic acid group, most of the aliphatic chain and part of the phenyl amino group of SAHA inserts into the pocket-like catalytic site of the enzyme, at the base of which is a zinc molecule. SAHA inhibits the activity of class I and II HDACs and is selective in altering gene expression. SAHA is synergistic in its anticancer activity with radiation, kinase inhibitors, cytotoxic agents and differentiating agents. In phase I clinical trial with orally administered SAHA the agent caused accumulation of acetylated histones in peripheral mononuclear cells and tumour cells, has excellent bioavailability and has shown antitumour activity in patients with haematologic and solid tumours."	15171260	"P. A. Marks, V. M. Richon, W. K. Kelly, J. H. Chiao and T. Miller"	MEDLINE2011	Epigenetics in cancer: what's the future?	0	Oncology (Williston Park)	"Epigenetics is a rapidly expanding field that focuses on stable changes in gene expression that are not accompanied by changes in DNA sequence and that are mediated primarily by DNA methylation and histone modifications. Disruption of the epigenome is a fundamental mechanism in cancer, and several epigenetic drugs that have proved to prolong survival and to be less toxic than conventional chemotherapy were recently approved by the FDA for cancer treatment. These include azacitidine (Vidaza), decitabine (Dacogen), vorinostat (Zolinza), and romidepsin (Istodax). Promising results of combination clinical trials with DNA methylation inhibitors and histone deacetylase inhibitors have recently been reported, and data are emerging that describe molecular determinants of clinical responses. Despite significant advances, challenges remain, including a lack of predictive markers, unclear mechanisms of response and resistance, and rare responses in solid tumors. Preclinical studies are ongoing with novel classes of agents that target various components of the epigenetic machinery. In this review, we focus on recent clinical and translational data in the epigenetics field that have potential in cancer therapy."	21548464	Y. Boumber and J.-P. J. Issa	MEDLINE2010	HDAC inhibitors in cancer care	0	Oncology (Williston Park)	"The epigenetic control of gene expression has been shown to play an important role in cancer initiation, progression, and resistance. Thus, agents that modify the epigenetic environment of tumors will likely be an important addition to the anticancer arsenal. Specifically, there is much interest in modulating histone acetylation using a new class of drugs, histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors. Preclinical data have demonstrated the efficacy of various HDAC inhibitors as anticancer agents, with the greatest effects shown when HDAC inhibitors are used in combination with other therapies. As a result of encouraging preclinical data, numerous HDAC inhibitors are being investigated in clinical trials either as monotherapies or in conjunction with other treatments such as chemotherapy, biologic therapy, or radiation therapy. In fact, vorinostat and depsipeptide, two actively studied HDAC inhibitors, were recently approved for the treatment of refractory cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Although the use of HDAC inhibitors has generated great enthusiasm, a significant amount of work still needs to be done in order to understand their mechanisms of action, as well as to determine the appropriate patient characteristics and subsets of cancer for which HDAC inhibitors hold the most potential for effective treatment."	20361469	"J. E. Shabason, P. J. Tofilon and K. Camphausen"	MEDLINE1985	[Water-soluble derivatives of factor IA of pristinamycins. Interaction with the bacterial ribosome]	0	Pathologie Biologie	"The IA component of pristinamycins is a depsipeptide with a bacteriostatic effect on Gram positive bacteria. IA is made bactericidal by association with the IIA component of pristinamycins. Use of IA is limited because of its poor solubility in water. For this reason several water soluble IA derivatives have been synthesized. As for IA, these derivatives are fluorescent, a property used to study the binding of each compound to bacterial ribosomes of Escherichia coli (G-) and Staphylococcus aureus (G+). Two different techniques were used: direct study of fluorescence of the ribosome-antibiotic complex, and study of polarization of the fluorescence of the antibiotic bound to its receptor site. In addition to determination of binding parameters, these techniques can evaluate molecular synergy between pristinamycin IA (PIA) derivatives and pristinamycin IIA (PIIA) derivatives. MICs for the tested molecules correlate strongly with their binding parameters."	3937126	"M. Aumercier, P. Lacroix, M. L. Capmau and F. Le Goffic"	MEDLINE1991	Effects of antimitotic agents on tubulin-nucleotide interactions	0	Pharmacology & Therapeutics	"The interaction of antimitotic drugs with guanine nucleotides in the tubulin-microtubule system is reviewed. Antimitotic agent-tubulin interactions can be covalent, entropic, allosteric or coupled to other equilibria (such as divalent cation binding, alternate polymer formation, or the stabilization of native tubulin structure). Antimitotics bind to tubulin at a few common sites and alter the ability of tubulin to form microtubules. Colchicine and podophyllotoxin compete for a common overlapping binding site but only colchicine induces GTPase activity and large conformational changes in the tubulin heterodimer. The vinca alkaloids, vinblastine and vincristine, the macrocyclic ansa macrolides, maytansine and ansamitocin P-3, and the fungal antimitotic, rhizoxin, share and compete for a different binding site near the exchangeable nucleotide binding site. The macrocyclic heptapeptide, phomopsin A, and the depsipeptide, dolastatin 10, bind to a site adjacent to the vinca alkaloid and nucleotide sites. Colchicine, vinca alkaloids, dolastatin 10 and phomopsin A induce alternate polymer formation (sheets for colchicine, spirals for vinblastine and vincristine and rings for dolastatin 10 and phomopsin A). Maytansine, ansamitocin P-3 and rhizoxin inhibit vinblastine-induced spiral formation. Taxol stoichiometrically induces microtubule formation and, in the presence of GTP, assembly-associated GTP hydrolysis. Analogs of guanine nucleotides also alter polymer morphology. Thus, sites on tubulin for drugs and nucleotides communicate allosterically with the interfaces that form longitudinal and lateral contacts within a microtubule. Microtubule associated proteins (MAPs), divalent cations, and buffer components can alter the surface interactions of tubulin and thus modulate the interactions between antimitotic drugs and guanine nucleotides. [References: 215]"	1818332	J. J. Correia	MEDLINE1997	D-Ala-D-Ala ligases from glycopeptide antibiotic-producing organisms are highly homologous to the enterococcal vancomycin-resistance ligases VanA and VanB	0	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America	"The crisis in antibiotic resistance has resulted in an increasing fear of the emergence of untreatable organisms. Resistance to the glycopeptide antibiotic vancomycin in the enterococci, and the spread of these pathogens throughout the environment, has shown that this scenario is a matter of fact rather than fiction. The basis for vancomycin resistance is the manufacture of the depsipeptide D-Ala-D-lactate, which is incorporated into the peptidoglycan cell wall in place of the vancomycin target D-Ala-D-Ala. Pivotal to the resistance mechanism is the production of a D-Ala-D-Ala ligase capable of ester formation. Two highly efficient depsipeptide ligases have been cloned from vancomycin-resistant enterococci: VanA and VanB. These ligases show high amino acid sequence similarity to each other ( approximately 75%), but less so to other D-Ala-D-X ligases (<30%). We have cloned ddls from two glycopeptide-producing organisms, the vancomycin producer Amycolatopsis orientalis and the A47934 producer Streptomyces toyocaensis. These ligases show strong predicted amino acid homology to VanA and VanB (>60%) but not to other D-Ala-D-X ligases (<35%). The D-Ala-D-Ala ligase from S. toyocaensis shows D-Ala-D-lactate synthase activity in cell-free extracts of S. lividans transformed with the ddl gene and confirms the predicted enzymatic activity. These results imply a close evolutionary relationship between resistance mechanisms in the clinics and in drug-producing bacteria."	9177243	"C. G. Marshall, G. Broadhead, B. K. Leskiw and G. D. Wright"	MEDLINE1984	beta-Lactamase-catalyzed hydrolysis of acyclic depsipeptides and acyl transfer to specific amino acid acceptors	0	Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America	"beta-Lactamases from all three classes, A, B, and C, catalyze the hydrolysis of specific acyclic depsipeptide (PhCH2CONHCR1R2CO2CHR3CO2H) analogs of acyl-D-alanyl-D-alanine peptides. The depsipeptides investigated, which are chemically as reactive toward nucleophiles as penicillins, are in general poor substrates, although differences between the classes of beta-lactamases have been observed: the order of effectiveness seems to be C greater than B greater than A. Certain class A and C beta-lactamases also catalyze phenylacetylglycyl transfer between phenylacetylglycyl depsipeptides and specific amino acid acceptors, a type of reaction hitherto identified more closely with D-alanyl-D-alanine transpeptidases than with beta-lactamases. Preliminary indications of an acyl-enzyme intermediate in these reactions have been obtained. These results support the suggestion [Tipper, D.J. and Strominger, J.L. (1965) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 54, 1133-1141] that beta-lactamases are evolutionary descendants of bacterial cell wall D-alanyl-D-alanine transpeptidases."	6424114	R. F. Pratt and C. P. Govardhan	MEDLINE2004	Enhancement of radiation sensitivity of human squamous carcinoma cells by histone deacetylase inhibitors	0	Radiation Research	"Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are emerging therapeutic agents with potential for disruption of critical cellular processes in cancer cells. Transcriptional regulation, differentiation, cell cycle arrest, radiation sensitization, and apoptosis have been observed in response to exposure to HDAC inhibitors. In the present study, we observed that several potent HDAC inhibitors, including trichostatin A, suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid, M344 (an analogue of hydroxamic acid), and the cyclic tetrapeptide, depsipeptide (FR90228), modulate cellular responses to ionizing radiation in cells of two human squamous carcinoma lines (SQ-20B and SCC-35), previously characterized as intrinsically resistant to radiation. Also exposure to IC(50) concentrations of these inhibitors, radiation sensitivities were enhanced in both cell lines. Depsipeptide exhibited the greatest effect on SQ-20B cells, decreasing D(0) values from 2.62 Gy to 1.64 Gy. M344 was the most active drug in sensitizing SCC-35 cells, decreasing D(0) values from 1.91 Gy to 1.21 Gy. The mechanisms underlying HDAC inhibitor-induced radiosensitization were further investigated by extending trichostatin A studies to assess cell cycle distributions and levels of apoptosis. Treatment of SQ-20B cells with radiosensitizing concentrations of trichostatin A resulted in cell cycle arrest in G(1) phase (>70%) and inhibition of DNA synthesis. Contrary to previous reports, induction of apoptosis was very low and caspase 3 and 9 were not activated. Taken together, these results implicate G(1) arrest and inhibition of DNA synthesis in the mechanisms underlying radiation sensitization by trichostatin A and support the use of HDAC inhibitors for targeting radioresistant cancers."	15161353	"Y. Zhang, M. Jung, A. Dritschilo and M. Jung"	MEDLINE2006	Review: recent clinical trials in epigenetic therapy	0	Reviews on Recent Clinical Trials	"Epigenetic factors such as DNA methylation and histone deacetylation are known to contribute to the malignant transformation of cells by silencing critical genes. Drugs that inhibit DNA methyltransferases or histone deacetylases were shown to have the potential to reactivate silenced genes and induce differentiation or apoptosis of malignant cells. The most intensively studied class of such agents is DNA methyltransferase inhibitors, including 5-azacytidine (azacitidine) and 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (decitabine). In 2004, azacitidine was approved for the treatment of myelodysplastic syndrome on the basis of phase II and III studies that showed a response rate (complete and partial responses) of 15%. Azacitidine is also being evaluated in clinical trials for other malignant diseases. Decitabine has response rates of 17-49% in myelodysplastic syndrome in multiple phase II and III studies and also activity in acute and chronic myelogenous leukemia. Histone deacetylase inhibitors belong to another class of epigenetic modifying agents that include depsipeptide, butyrate derivatives, suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid and valproic acid. No agent in this class has been studied in a phase III trial, but several agents have been or are being studied in phase II trials. Further research is needed to determine the appropriate patient selection and dosing schedules. [References: 136]"	18473969	Y. Oki and J.-P. J. Issa	MEDLINE2004	[Violacein: a molecule of biological interest originating from the soil-borne bacterium Chromobacterium violaceum]	0	Revue de Medecine Interne	"INTRODUCTION: Soil micro-organisms have evolved functions that allow them to withstand the strong competition for survival that characterizes most of their habitats. The production of antibiotic or antifungal compounds is one of these mechanisms. The relevant molecules often exhibit valuable therapeutic properties. EXEGESIS: Chromobacterium violaceum is a soil-borne bacterium producing a characteristic antibiotic termed violacein. It is part of a series of compounds released by C. violaceum to oppose competitors and predators in the soil and water environments. Violacein, and one of these compounds, i.e. structure FR901228, exhibit antiparasitic and antitumoral activities of potential medical interest. Genes involved in the synthesis of these compounds are available, the genome sequence of C. violaceum (strain ATCC 12472) being published. CONCLUSIONS: The above example, involving Chromobacterium, is not an exception: soil constitutes a reservoir of molecules, enzymatic activities and micro-organisms of biological interest, the study of which will undoubtedly lead to developments in fields as diverse as agronomy or animal and human therapeutics."	15363621	"Y. Dessaux, C. Elmerich and D. Faure"	MEDLINE2010	Novel agents in development for peripheral T-cell lymphoma	0	Seminars in Hematology	"Though peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL) is an area of significant unmet therapeutic need, a number of new treatment options are available for patients, especially those with relapsed or refractory disease. A plethora of drugs are now in development for PTCL, but drugs that truly target novel disease biology are noticeably absent. Combinations of T-cell centric agents could produce novel platforms of therapy to replace the relatively ineffective CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone)-based regimens. Among agents with T-cell activity are the folate analog pralatrexate, histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) like romidepsin, the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib, the immunomodulatory agent lenalidomide, the purine nucleoside phosphorylase (PNP) inhibitor forodesine, the nucleoside analog gemcitabine, and BH3-only mimetics like ABT-263 and ABT-737. Copyright 2010. Published by Elsevier Inc. [References: 24]"	20359580	O. A. O'Connor	MEDLINE2002	Cell cycle phase perturbations and apoptosis in tumour cells induced by aplidine	0	British Journal of Cancer	"Aplidine, dehydrodidemnin B, is a marine depsipeptide isolated from the Mediterranean tunicate Aplidium albicans currently in phase II clinical trial. In human Molt-4 leukaemia cells Aplidine was found to be cytotoxic at nanomolar concentrations and to induce both a G(1) arrest and a G(2) blockade. The drug-induced cell cycle perturbations and subsequent cell death do not appear to be related to macromolecular synthesis (protein, RNA, DNA) since the effects occur at concentrations (e.g. 10 nM) in which macromolecule synthesis was not markedly affected. Ten nM Aplidine for 1 h inhibited ornithine decarboxylase activity, with a subsequently strong decrease in putrescine levels. This finding has questionable relevance since addition of putrescine did not significantly reduce the cell cycle perturbations or the cytotoxicity of Aplidine. The cell cycle perturbations caused by Aplidine were also not due to an effect on the cyclin-dependent kinases. Although the mechanism of action of Aplidine is still unclear, the cell cycle phase perturbations and the rapid induction of apoptosis in Molt-4 cells appear to be due to a mechanism different from that of known anticancer drugs. Copyright 2002 Cancer Research UK"	11986788	"E. Erba, L. Bassano, G. Di Liberti, I. Muradore, G. Chiorino, P. Ubezio, S. Vignati, A. Codegoni, M. A. Desiderio, G. Faircloth, J. Jimeno and M. D'Incalci"	MEDLINE2011	Schedule-dependent synergy of histone deacetylase inhibitors with DNA damaging agents in small cell lung cancer	0	Cell Cycle	"Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is an aggressive lung cancer subtype in need of better therapies. Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDIs) promote increased lysine acetylation in nucleosomal histones and are thought to relax chromatin, thereby allowing increased access of transcription factors and DNA damaging agents alike to DNA. We studied whether two HDIs, belinostat and romidepsin, could be effectively combined with cisplatin or etoposide (VP-16) for SCLC cells. Analysis of cell survival and synergy was performed using CalcuSyn mathematical modeling to calculate a combination index. Immunostaining of gammaH2AX was performed to evaluate persistence of DNA damage following simultaneous or sequential exposure. Based on CalcuSyn modeling, HDIs synergized with DNA damaging agents only when added simultaneously. An additive-to-antagonistic effect was seen with HDI pretreatment for 24 h or with addition after cisplatin or etoposide. Furthermore, pretreatment with HDIs resulted in normalization of cell cycle and reduced PARP degradation as compared with simultaneous treatment. The increase in gammaH2AX phosphorylation confirmed that simultaneous but not sequential treatment enhanced double-stranded DNA breaks. These results suggest that DNA relaxation is not required for synergy of HDIs with DNA damaging agents, and that scheduling of drug administration will be critical for rational development of clinical protocols."	21900747	"V. L. Luchenko, C. D. Salcido, Y. Zhang, K. Agama, E. Komlodi-Pasztor, R. F. Murphy, G. Giaccone, Y. Pommier, S. E. Bates and L. Varticovski"	MEDLINE2002	Histone deacetylase inhibitor FK228 inhibits tumor angiogenesis	0	International Journal of Cancer	"FK228 (formerly FR901228) was recently isolated from Chromobacterium violaceum as a potent antitumor agent and its biologic target protein was identified as histone deacetylase (HDAC). Because of its unique chemical structure (i.e., bicyclic depsipeptide) and activity profile in the National Cancer Institute's developmental therapeutics program, FK228 is currently in a phase I clinical trial for cancer therapy. In the present study, we investigated the antiangiogenic activity of FK228 in vivo and in vitro. FK228 potently blocked the hypoxia-stimulated proliferation, invasion, migration, adhesion and tube formation of bovine aortic endothelial cells at the same concentration at which the agent inhibited the HDAC activity of cells. In addition, FK228 inhibited the neovascularization of chick embryo and that of adult mice in the Matrigel plug assay. Interestingly, the expression of angiogenic-stimulating factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor or kinase insert domain receptor were suppressed by FK228, whereas that of angiogenic-inhibiting factors such as von Hippel Lindau and neurofibromin2 were induced, suggesting that a gene-transcription effect was involved in the inhibition of angiogenesis by FK228. These results indicate that FK228 is a novel antiangiogenic agent and may suppress tumor expansion, at least in part, by the inhibition of neovascularization. Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc."	11774279	"H. J. Kwon, M. S. Kim, M. J. Kim, H. Nakajima and K.-W. Kim"	MEDLINE2002	"(-)-Doliculide, a new macrocyclic depsipeptide enhancer of actin assembly"	0	Journal of Biological Chemistry	"The cytotoxic, cyclic depsipeptide (-)-doliculide was originally isolated by Ishiwata et al. (Ishiwata, H., Nemoto, T., Ojika, M., and Yamada, K. (1994) J. Org. Chem. 59, 4710-4711 and Ishiwata, H., Sone, H., Kigoshi, H., and Yamada, K. (1994) J. Org. Chem. 59, 4712-4713) from the sea hare Dolabella auricularia collected in Japanese waters, but the mechanism of action of the depsipeptide was not known. Using synthetic (-)-doliculide, we found that the compound arrests cells at the G(2)/M phase of the cell cycle by interfering with normal actin assembly. In cells, normal stress fibers disappeared and were replaced by multiple clumps of apparently aggregated F-actin. These effects of (-)-doliculide on cells were essentially identical to those obtained with jasplakinolide. Like jasplakinolide, (-)-doliculide caused the hyperassembly of purified actin into F-actin as measured both fluorometrically and by centrifugation. In addition, (-)-doliculide, like jasplakinolide, readily displaced a fluorescent phalloidin derivative from actin polymer. In these biochemical assays (-)-doliculide and jasplakinolide were quantitatively virtually identical in their behaviors. Similar effects have also been reported with a series of depsipeptides known as chondramides. Using recently developed, computer-driven shape descriptor analysis (Mansfield, M. L., Covell, D. G., and Jernigan, R. L. (2002) J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 42, 259-273), we compared (-)-doliculide with jasplakinolide, phalloidin, and chondramide C to gain insight into a possible pharmacophore that would explain the apparent binding of this diverse group of molecules at the same site on F-actin. We found that the segment of (-)-doliculide that best overlapped the other molecules encompassed its phenyl and isopropyl side chains and the portion of the macrocycle between these substituents."	12077149	"R. Bai, D. G. Covell, C. Liu, A. K. Ghosh and E. Hamel"	MEDLINE2007	FDG-PET Lymphoma Demonstration Project Invitational Workshop	0	Academic Radiology			"G. J. Kelloff, D. M. Sullivan, W. Wilson, B. Cheson, M. Juweid, G. Q. Mills, A. D. Zelenetz, S. J. Horning, W. Weber, D. J. Sargent, L. Dodd, E. Korn, J. Armitage, R. Schilsky, M. Christian, O. A. O'Connor, S. J. Wang, A. T. Farrell, R. Pazdur, M. Graham, R. L. Wahl, S. M. Larson, L. Kostakoglu, M. Daube-Witherspoon, C. Gastonis, B. A. Siegel, L. K. Shankar, D. B. Lee, H. R. Higley, C. C. Sigman, D. Carucci, D. Timko, L. J. deGennaro, E. Sigal, A. Barker and J. Woodcock"	Embase2009	New horizons for plasmocytic myeloma therapy. [Polish]	0	Acta Haematologica Polonica			M. Kraj	Embase2005	Novel approaches to the management of non-hodgkin lymphoma	0	American Journal of Cancer			T. Everington and A. H. Goldstone	Embase2010	HDAC inhibitors in lymphomas and solid tumors: Thinking about drug resistance	0	Annals of Oncology			"S. E. Bates, R. L. Piekarz, R. Frye, M. L. Turner, J. J. Wright, R. W. Robey, Z. Zhan, V. Luchenko, W. D. Figg, E. R. Gardner, S. M. Steinberg, A. Ling, E. S. Jaffe, M. Stetler-Stevenson and A. T. Fojo"	Embase2006	Importance of p53 for cancer onset and therapy	0	Anti-Cancer Drugs			S. Haupt and Y. Haupt	Embase2005	Chromatin modifications as targets for new anticancer drugs	0	Archiv der Pharmazie			S. Schafer and M. Jung	Embase2010	Malignant lymphomas of the skin - Update on diagnosis and therapy: Primary cutaneous T-cell lymphomas. [German]	0	Best Practice Onkologie			"C. Hallermann, J. Atzpodien and H. J. Schulze"	Embase2004	Administration of HDAC inhibitors to reactivate HIV-1 expression in latent cellular reservoirs: Implications for the development of therapeutic strategies	0	Biochemical Pharmacology			"D. Demonte, V. Quivy, Y. Colette and C. Van Lint"	Embase2005	ABC transporters in the balance: Is there a role in multidrug resistance?	0	Biochemical Society Transactions			O. Polgar and S. E. Bates	Embase2010	Epigenetic cancer therapy: Proof of concept and remaining challenges	0	BioEssays			C. Mund and F. Lyko	Embase2000	"Butyrate as a model for ""gene-regulating chemoprevention and chemotherapy"""	0	BioFactors			Y. Sowa and T. Sakai	Embase2011	Analysis of patients with common peripheral T-cell lymphoma subtypes from a phase 2 study of romidepsin in relapsed or refractory peripheral t-cell lymphoma	0	Blood			"B. Coiffier, B. Pro, H. M. Prince, F. M. Foss, L. Sokol, M. Greenwood, D. Caballero, P. Borchmann, F. Morschhauser, M. Wilhelm, L. Pinter-Brown, S. Padmanabhan, A. R. Shustov, J. Nichols, S. Carroll, J. Balser and S. M. Horwitz"	Embase2009	"Characterization of cyclic hematologic changes observed in patients with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) receiving romidepsin, a novel histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor"	0	Blood			"S. Whittaker, E. J. Kim, M. Prince, M. F. Demierre, C. Giver, S. Lonial, R. Piekarz, Y. H. Kim, J. Nichols, D. Nix and S. Bates"	Embase2009	The combination of romidepsin and bortezomib results in synergistic induction of apoptosis in human B-lymphoma cell lines	0	Blood			"D. S. Deshpande, M. J. Lechowicz, R. Sinha, J. L. Kaufman, L. H. Boise, S. Lonial and C. R. Flowers"	Embase2011	Exposure-QTc response analysis of class 1 selective histone deacetylase inhibitor romidepsin	0	Blood			"C. J. Godfrey, C. H. Cabell, B. Balser, J. Wolfson, J. Nichols and H. A. Burris"	Embase2011	HDAC and LSD1 inhibitors synergize to induce cell death in acute leukemia cells	0	Blood			"L. Ramirez, M. Singh and J. Chandra"	Embase2011	Romidepsin in the treatment of patients with relapsed or refractory Cutaneous T-Cell Lymphoma (CTCL): The New York university cancer center experience	0	Blood			S. Jain and K. B. Hymes	Embase2011	Therapeutic targeting of the Bcl-6: P53 axis with histone deacetylase inhibitors in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma	0	Blood			"J. E. Amengual, M. Kalac, L. Scotto, P. A. Sleckman, E. Marchi, C. Deng, D. C. Bongero, S. Jain, J. B. Buitrago and O. A. O'Connor"	Embase2011	Validation of a novel bioluminescent mouse model of sezary syndrome for preclinical drug screening	0	Blood			"S. Jain, L. Scotto, E. Marchi, M. Kalac, J. Amengual, J. B. Buitrago and O. A. O'Connor"	Embase2006	Clinical and laboratory experience of vorinostat (suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid) in the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma	0	British Journal of Cancer			M. Duvic and C. Zhang	Embase2000	P21-dependent G1 arrest with downregulation of cyclin D1 and upregulation of cyclin E by the histone deacetylase inhibitor FR901228	0	British Journal of Cancer			"V. Sandor, A. Senderowicz, S. Mertins, D. Sackett, E. Sausville, M. V. Blagosklonny and S. E. Bates"	Embase2009	Evaluation of HDAC inhibitors on Stat3 activation status in primary cutaneous T-cell lymphoma	0	British Journal of Dermatology			"R. C. T. McKenzie, C. L. Jones, I. Tosi, S. J. Whittaker and T. J. Mitchell"	Embase2006	FK228 (depsipeptide): A HDAC inhibitor with pleiotropic antitumor activities	0	Cancer Chemotherapy and Pharmacology			"P. A. Konstantinopoulos, G. P. Vandoros and A. G. Papavassiliou"	Embase2007	Small molecule signal transduction inhibitors for the treatment of solid tumors	0	Cancer Investigation			A. Leary and S. R. D. Johnston	Embase2009	Isoform-specific histone deacetylase inhibitors: The next step?	0	Cancer Letters			"S. Balasubramanian, E. Verner and J. J. Buggy"	Embase2003	Modulation of coxsackie-adenovirus receptor expression for increased adenoviral transgene expression	0	Cancer Research			"A. Hemminki, A. Kanerva, B. Liu, M. Wang, R. D. Alvarez, G. P. Siegal and D. T. Curiel"	Embase2006	Non-viral vectors for cancer therapy	0	Cancer Science			Y. Kaneda and Y. Tabata	Embase2004	Histone deacetylase inhibitors - A new tool to treat cancer	0	Cancer Treatment Reviews			"R. Somech, S. Izraeli and A. J. Simon"	Embase2009	Antiproliferative and proapoptotic effects of proteasome inhibitors and their combination with histone deacetylase inhibitors on leukemia cells	0	Cardiovascular and Hematological Disorders - Drug Targets			"O. Fuchs, D. Provaznikova, I. Marinov, K. Kuzelova and I. Spicka"	Embase2005	How cancer could be cured by 2015	0	Cell Cycle			M. V. Blagosklonny	Embase2005	TRAIL: At the center of drugable anti-tumor pathways	0	Cell Cycle			"N. Clarke, A. Nebbioso, L. Altucci and H. Gronemeyer"	Embase2007	Novel role of HDAC inhibitors in AML1/ETO AML cells: Activation of apoptosis and phagocytosis through induction of annexin A1	0	Cell Death and Differentiation			"Y. Tabe, L. Jin, R. Contractor, D. Gold, P. Ruvolo, S. Radke, Y. Xu, Y. Tsutusmi-Ishii, K. Miyake, N. Miyake, S. Kondo, A. Ohsaka, I. Nagaoka, M. Andreeff and M. Konopleva"	Embase2006	Acetylation and histone deacetylase inhibitors in cancer	0	Cellular Oncology			"M. S. Q. Kortenhorst, M. A. Carducci and S. Shabbeer"	Embase2010	Frontline regimens for multiple myeloma patients	0	Clinical Advances in Hematology and Oncology			S. Lonial	Embase2005	Targeting epigenetic changes in acute myeloid leukemia	0	Clinical Advances in Hematology and Oncology			W. Blum and G. Marcucci	Embase2010	Epigenetic therapy of lymphoma using histone deacetylase inhibitors	0	Clinical and Translational Oncology			"M. Cotto, F. Cabanillas, M. Tirado, M. V. Garcia and E. Pacheco"	Embase2002	Histone deacetylase inhibitors: A new class of potential therapeutic agents for cancer treatment	0	Clinical Cancer Research			V. M. Richon and J. P. O'Brien	Embase2010	Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors in recent clinical trials for cancer therapy	0	Clinical Epigenetics			"J. M. Wagner, B. Hackanson, M. Lubbert and M. Jung"	Embase2003	Involvement of gene-diet/drug interaction in DNA methylation and its contribution to complex diseases: From cancer to schizophrenia	0	Clinical Genetics			"S. M. Singh, B. Murphy and R. L. O'Reilly"	Embase2002	38th Annual Meeting of the American Society of clinical oncology	0	Clinical Lymphoma			A. Gibson and H. DeGrendele	Embase2004	"Depsipeptide, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, shows promising clinical activity in T-cell lymphomas"	0	Clinical Lymphoma			"G. K. Reddy, S. Bates and V. K. Jain"	Embase2006	"47th Annual Meeting of the American Society of Hematology; Atlanta, GA, December 10-13, 2005"	0	Clinical Lymphoma and Myeloma			"L. Shivakumar, C. Schwab, B. L. Abbott, S. Jagganath and T. Lin"	Embase2010	The role of histone deacetylase inhibitors in the treatment of patients with cutaneous T-Cell lymphoma	0	"Clinical Lymphoma, Myeloma and Leukemia"			K. B. Hymes	Embase2009	Population pharmacokinetics of cyclic depsipeptide FK228 in patients with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma and relapsed peripheral T-cell lymphoma	0	Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics			"S. Woo, E. R. Gardner, X. Chen, S. B. Ockers, C. E. Baum, T. M. Sissung, D. K. Price, R. Frye, R. L. Peikarz, S. E. Bates and W. D. Figg"	Embase2005	DNA methylation disturbances as novel therapeutic target in lung cancer: Preclinical and clinical results	0	Critical Reviews in Oncology/Hematology			W. Digel and M. Lubbert	Embase2008	Epigenetic biomarkers for human cancer: The time is now	0	Critical Reviews in Oncology/Hematology			S. Mulero-Navarro and M. Esteller	Embase2008	The potential role of histone deacetylase inhibitors in the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer	0	Critical Reviews in Oncology/Hematology			"C. Gridelli, A. Rossi and P. Maione"	Embase2007	Telomerase-specific oncolytic virotherapy for human cancer with the hTERT promoter	0	Current Cancer Drug Targets			"T. Fujiwara, Y. Urata and N. Tanaka"	Embase2010	Role of histone deacetylases and their inhibitors in cancer biology and treatment	0	Current Clinical Pharmacology			J. H. Beumer and H. Tawbi	Embase2007	Histone deacetylase inhibitors: Molecular and biological activity as a premise to clinical application	0	Current Drug Metabolism			"V. Santini, A. Gozzini and G. Ferrari"	Embase2004	Redifferentiation therapy in advanced thyroid cancer	0	"Current Drug Targets: Immune, Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders"			B. R. Haugen	Embase2007	Histone deacetylase inhibitors: Novel immunomodulators	0	Current Enzyme Inhibition			Y. Sun and P. Reddy	Embase2001	Cell cycle regulation in the G1 phase: A promising target for the development of new chemotherapeutic anticancer agents	0	Current Medicinal Chemistry			"T. Owa, H. Yoshino, K. Yoshimatsu and T. Nagasu"	Embase2004	Chemistry and biology of cyclic depsipeptides of medicinal and biological interest	0	Current Medicinal Chemistry			"F. Sarabia, S. Chammaa, A. Sanchez Ruiz, L. Martin Ortiz and F. J. Lopez Herrera"	Embase2009	Cyclodepsipeptides - Potential drugs and lead compounds in the drug development process	0	Current Medicinal Chemistry			"R. Lemmens-Gruber, M. R. Kamyar and R. Dornetshuber"	Embase2007	Drug-mediated targeted disruption of multiple protein activities through functional inhibition of the Hsp90 chaperone complex	0	Current Medicinal Chemistry			"D. J. Stravopodis, L. H. Margaritis and G. E. Voutsinas"	Embase2003	From discovery to the coming generation of histone deacetylase inhibitors	0	Current Medicinal Chemistry			"M. Yoshida, A. Matsuyama, Y. Komatsu and N. Nishino"	Embase2003	Histone deacetylase inhibitors: From chromatin remodeling to experimental cancer therapeutics	0	Current Medicinal Chemistry			"J. Arts, S. de Schepper and K. Van Emelen"	Embase2007	"Human endometrial and ovarian cancer cells: Histone deacetylase inhibitors exhibit antiproliferative activity, potently induce cell cycle arrest, and stimulate apoptosis"	0	Current Medicinal Chemistry			N. Takai and H. Narahara	Embase2009	Novel drugs for chronic lymphoid leukemias: Mechanism of action and therapeutic activity	0	Current Medicinal Chemistry			T. Robak	Embase2005	"Histone deacetylase inhibitors: Latest developments, trends and prospects"	0	Current Medicinal Chemistry - Anti-Cancer Agents			"O. Moradei, C. R. Maroun, I. Paquin and A. Vaisburg"	Embase2003	The interaction of histone deacetylase inhibitors and DNA methyltransferase inhibitors in the treatment of human cancer cells	0	Current Medicinal Chemistry - Anti-Cancer Agents			W. G. Zhu and G. A. Otterson	Embase2010	Naturally occurring regulators of histone acetylation/deacetylation	0	Current Nutrition and Food Science			"F. Folmer, B. Orlikova, M. Schnekenburger, M. Dicato and M. Diederich"	Embase2008	Melanoma and the tumor microenvironment	0	Current Oncology Reports			J. Villanueva and M. Herlyn	Embase2005	New therapeutic options for mesothelioma	0	Current Oncology Reports			R. K. Goudar	Embase2004	Synthesis of novel hydroxamate and non-hydroxamate histone deacetylase inhibitors	0	Current Opinion in Drug Discovery and Development			M. L. Curtin	Embase2009	Novel therapies for peripheral T-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphomas	0	Current Opinion in Hematology			B. D. Cheson	Embase2003	HDAC inhibitors for the treatment of cancer	0	Current Opinion in Investigational Drugs			"J. P. Secrist, X. Zhou and V. M. Richon"	Embase2006	Heat shock protein-90 inhibitors: A chronicle from geldanamycin to today's agents	0	Current Opinion in Investigational Drugs			"G. Chiosis, E. C. Lopes and D. Solit"	Embase2001	Overview: Rational integration of agents directed at novel therapeutic targets into combination chemotherapeutic regimens	0	Current Opinion in Investigational Drugs			S. Grant and P. Dent	Embase2007	Histone deacetylase inhibitors in cancer treatment: A review of the clinical toxicity and the modulation of gene expression in cancer cells	0	Current Pharmaceutical Biotechnology			"O. Bruserud, C. Stapnes, E. Ersvaer, B. T. Gjertsen and A. Ryningen"	Embase2006	Chromatin modifications (acetylation/ deacetylation/ methylation) as new targets for HIV therapy	0	Current Pharmaceutical Design			R. A. Varier and T. K. Kundu	Embase2007	Developing antiangiogenic peptide drugs for angiogenesis-related diseases	0	Current Pharmaceutical Design			K. N. Sulochana and R. Ge	Embase2008	From natural products to small molecule ketone histone deacetylase inhibitors: Development of new class specific agents	0	Current Pharmaceutical Design			P. Jones and C. Steinkuhler	Embase2007	The pharmaceutical potential of histone deacetylase inhibitors	0	Current Pharmaceutical Design			"G. Elaut, V. Rogiers and T. Vanhaecke"	Embase2012	The role of angiogenesis inhibitors in the management of melanoma	0	Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry			"K. A. Zaki, B. Basu and P. Corrie"	Embase2011	Novel targeted therapies and vaccination strategies for mesothelioma	0	Current Treatment Options in Oncology			M. Bagia and A. K. Nowak	Embase2010	Oncolytic viruses and histone deacetylase inhibitors-A multi-pronged strategy to target tumor cells	0	Cytokine and Growth Factor Reviews			"T. L. A. Nguyen, M. G. Wilson and J. Hiscott"	Embase2003	Systemic chemotherapy for the treatment of mycosis fungoides and Sezary syndrome	0	Dermatologic Therapy			T. M. Kuzel	Embase2005	Mechanisms of lung cancer	0	Drug Discovery Today: Disease Mechanisms			"E. N. Imyanitov, E. S. Kuligina, E. V. Belogubova, A. V. Togo and K. P. Hanson"	Embase2004	Molecular mechanisms of head and neck cancer	0	Drug Discovery Today: Disease Mechanisms			"M. L. Figueiredo, Y. Kim, X. C. Zhou, J. N. Myers and D. D. T. Wong"	Embase2004	Molecular mechanisms of myeloid malignancies: On the hunt for new therapeutic targets	0	Drug Discovery Today: Disease Mechanisms			J. Cools and J. Schwaller	Embase2005	"Anticancer therapeutics: ""Addictive"" targets, multi-targeted drugs, new drug combinations"	0	Drug Resistance Updates			H. J. Broxterman and N. H. Georgopapadakou	Embase2010	Current and emerging treatment strategies for cutaneous t-cell lymphoma	0	Drugs			F. Lansigan and F. M. Foss	Embase2012	Emerging new agents for the management of patients with non-small cell lung cancer	0	Drugs			E. Capelletto and S. Novello	Embase2003	New directions in the diagnosis and treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia	0	Drugs			F. Schriever and D. Huhn	Embase2004	Annual Update 2003/2004 - Treatment of genitourinary cancers	0	Drugs of the Future			I. Escudero	Embase2005	Annual update 2004/2005 - Treatment of head and neck cancer	0	Drugs of the Future			I. Escudero	Embase2009	"Targeting histone deacetylases for the treatment of immune, endocrine and metabolic disorders"	0	"Endocrine, Metabolic and Immune Disorders - Drug Targets"			"M. W. Lawless, S. Norris, K. J. O'Byrne and S. G. Gray"	Embase2010	Role of epigenomics in ovarian and endometrial cancers	0	Epigenomics			"C. Balch, D. E. Matei, T. H. M. Huang and K. P. Nephew"	Embase2009	Epigenetic histone acetylation modifiers in vascular remodelling: New targets for therapy in cardiovascular disease	0	European Heart Journal			"D. Pons, F. R. De Vries, P. J. Van Den Elsen, B. T. Heijmans, P. H. A. Quax and J. W. Jukema"	Embase2010	Recent progress in the treatment for T-cell malignancies	0	"European Journal of Cancer, Supplement"			P. L. Zinzani	Embase2005	Histone deacetylase inhibitors and cancer: From cell biology to the clinic	0	European Journal of Cell Biology			H. Hess-Stumpp	Embase2006	A perspective view of sodium iodide symporter research and its clinical implications	0	European Journal of Endocrinology			G. Riesco-Eizaguirre and P. Santisteban	Embase2005	Histone deacetylase inhibitors	0	European Journal of Medicinal Chemistry			C. Monneret	Embase2006	Pathogenesis and therapy of cutaneous lymphomas - Progress or impasse?	0	Experimental Dermatology			"R. Dummer, A. Cozzio and M. Urosevic"	Embase2004	Use of suicide genes for cancer gene therapy: Study of the different approaches	0	Expert Opinion on Biological Therapy			G. Vassaux and P. Martin-Duque	Embase2007	Post-translational modification of heat-shock protein 90: Impact on chaperone function	0	Expert Opinion on Drug Discovery			B. T. Scroggins and L. Neckers	Embase2008	Emerging drugs in cutaneous T cell lymphoma	0	Expert Opinion on Emerging Drugs			"D. S. Mestel, C. Assaf, M. Steinhoff, M. Beyer, M. Moebs and W. Sterry"	Embase2004	Histone modification enzymes: Novel targets for cancer drugs	0	Expert Opinion on Emerging Drugs			"R. Kristeleit, L. Stimson, P. Workman and W. Aherne"	Embase2007	Histone deacetylase inhibitors in cancer therapy	0	Expert Opinion on Investigational Drugs			"W. K. Rasheed, R. W. Johnstone and H. M. Prince"	Embase2002	Current patent status of histone deacetylase inhibitors	0	Expert Opinion on Therapeutic Patents			M. L. Curtin	Embase2007	Histone deacetylase inhibitors: An analysis of recent patenting activity	0	Expert Opinion on Therapeutic Patents			S. Price and H. J. Dyke	Embase2003	Tricyclic lactam and sultam derivatives as histone deacetylase inhibitors	0	Expert Opinion on Therapeutic Patents				Embase2006	Protein lysine acetylation in normal and leukaemic haematopoiesis: HDACs as possible therapeutic targets in adult AML	0	Expert Opinion on Therapeutic Targets			"O. Bruserud, C. Stapnes, K. J. Tronstad, A. Ryningen, N. Anensen and B. T. Gjertsen"	Embase2006	Targeting chaperones in transformed systems - A focus on Hsp90 and cancer	0	Expert Opinion on Therapeutic Targets			G. Chiosis	Embase2010	Targeting oxidative stress in cancer	0	Expert Opinion on Therapeutic Targets			"M. W. Lawless, K. J. O'Byrne and S. G. Gray"	Embase2007	The therapeutic uses of chromatin-modifying agents	0	Expert Opinion on Therapeutic Targets			A. Mai	Embase2002	CAMPATH (alemtuzumab) for the treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia and beyond	0	Expert Review of Anticancer Therapy			F. J. Dumont	Embase2007	Development of histone deacetylase inhibitors for cancer treatment	0	Expert Review of Anticancer Therapy			D. Marchion and P. Munster	Embase2008	Histone deacetylase inhibitors in lymphoma and solid malignancies	0	Expert Review of Anticancer Therapy			"W. Rasheed, M. Bishton, R. W. Johnston and H. M. Prince"	Embase2004	Molecular therapeutic approaches to acute myeloid leukemia: Targeting aberrant chromatin dynamics and signal transduction	0	Expert Review of Anticancer Therapy			F. Piazza and G. Semenzato	Embase2009	Molecularly targeted therapies for malignant glioma: Rationale for combinatorial strategies	0	Expert Review of Neurotherapeutics			N. G. Thaker and I. F. Pollack	Embase2005	New anti-cancer strategies: Epigenetic therapies and biomarkers	0	Frontiers in Bioscience			"C. Balch, J. S. Montgomery, H. I. Paik, S. Kim, T. H. M. Huang and K. P. Nephew"	Embase2011	Rational therapeutic combinations with histone deacetylase inhibitors for the treatment of cancer	0	Future Oncology			"K. T. Thurn, S. Thomas, A. Moore and P. N. Munster"	Embase2008	The treatment of mycosis fungoides	0	Giornale Italiano di Dermatologia e Venereologia			"D. S. Mestel, M. Beyer, M. Steinhoff, W. Sterry and C. Assaf"	Embase2006	Phase II trial of romidepsin (FK228 or depsipeptide) in peripheral T-cell lymphoma: Clinical activity and molecular markers	0	Haematologica Reports			"R. L. Piekarz, R. Frye, M. Turner, J. Wright, S. Allen, M. H. Kirschbaum, J. Zain, M. Prince, L. Hutchins, L. C. Showe, W. D. Figg, T. Fojo and S. E. Bates"	Embase2008	Cutaneous T-cell Lymphoma	0	Hematology/Oncology Clinics of North America			"F. Lansigan, J. Choi and F. M. Foss"	Embase2007	Islet Cell Carcinoma: Neuroendocrine Tumors of the Pancreas and Periampullary Region	0	Hematology/Oncology Clinics of North America			E. K. Nakakura and E. K. Bergsland	Embase2010	28th annual JPmorgan healthcare conference - Human genome sciences and celgene	0	IDrugs			S. Gale and G. Croasdell	Embase1999	"American Society of Clinical Oncology - 35th Annual Meeting: 15-18 May 1999, Atlanta, GA, USA"	0	IDrugs			E. Boven	Embase2002	"American Society of Clinical Oncology - 38th Annual Meeting: Biologic and targeted therapies: 18-21 May 2002, Orlando, FL, USA"	0	IDrugs			R. Erlich and L. Evans	Embase2003	"American Society of Hematology - 44th Annual Meeting and Exposition: 6-10 December 2002, Philadelphia, PA, USA"	0	IDrugs			J. E. Talmadge	Embase2004	"Drug discovery and development track highlights. 18-20 October 2004, Mumbai, India"	0	IDrugs			R. Mayfield	Embase2006	"Histone post-translational modification: From discovery to the clinic. 7 April 2006, Southampton, UK"	0	IDrugs			N. R. Thomas	Embase2003	"Targeted Therapies in Cancer - Second International Congress: August 29-31 2003, Washington DC, USA"	0	IDrugs			S. Grant	Embase2005	"Targeting the cell cycle and HDAC inhibitors. 16-20 April 2005, Anaheim, CA, USA"	0	IDrugs			"T. Phillips, T. Collins and J. Davies"	Embase2005	Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) signalling and T-cell lymphomas	0	Immunology			T. J. Mitchell and S. John	Embase2005	Acute myeloid leukemia: Therapeutic impact of epigenetic drugs	0	International Journal of Biochemistry and Cell Biology			"L. Altucci, N. Clarke, A. Nebbioso, A. Scognamiglio and H. Gronemeyer"	Embase2010	Targeted treatment and new agents in peripheral T-cell lymphoma	0	International Journal of Hematology			J. M. Zain and O. O'Connor	Embase2008	Histone deacetylase inhibitors: Apoptotic effects and clinical implications (review)	0	International Journal of Oncology			"S. Emanuele, M. Lauricella and G. Tesoriere"	Embase2011	Histone deacetylase inhibitors in the treatment of hematological malignancies and solid tumors	0	Journal of Biomedicine and Biotechnology			L. Bagella and M. Federico	Embase2009	Histone deacetylase inhibitors: Potential in cancer therapy	0	Journal of Cellular Biochemistry			P. A. Marks and W. S. Xu	Embase2009	"Pooled analyses of two international, multicenter clinical studies of romidepsin in 167 patients with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL)"	0	Journal of Clinical Oncology			"M. Demierre, S. Whittaker, Y. Kim, E. Kim, R. Piekarz, M. Prince, J. Nichols, J. Balser, A. Prentice and S. Bates"	Embase2009	New clinical developments in histone deacetylase inhibitors for epigenetic therapy of cancer	0	Journal of Hematology and Oncology			"S. Cang, Y. Ma and D. Liu"	Embase2006	The role of epigenetic alterations in pancreatic cancer	0	Journal of Hepato-Biliary-Pancreatic Surgery			N. Sato and M. Goggins	Embase2006	Drug discovery from natural products	0	Journal of Industrial Microbiology and Biotechnology			"V. P. Gullo, J. McAlpine, K. S. Lam, D. Baker and F. Petersen"	Embase2001	"Genes, chromatin, and breast cancer: An epigenetic tale"	0	Journal of Mammary Gland Biology and Neoplasia			"L. M. Mielnicki, H. L. Asch and B. B. Asch"	Embase2001	Role of DNA methylation and histone acetylation in steroid receptor expression in breast cancer	0	Journal of Mammary Gland Biology and Neoplasia			"L. Yan, X. Yang and N. E. Davidson"	Embase2010	Toward the development of innovative bifunctional agents to induce differentiation and to promote apoptosis in leukemia: Clinical candidates and perspectives	0	Journal of Medicinal Chemistry			"I. S. Vizirianakis, M. Chatzopoulou, I. D. Bonovolias, I. Nicolaou, V. J. Demopoulos and A. S. Tsiftsoglou"	Embase2006	Chemical genomics with natural products	0	Journal of Microbiology and Biotechnology			H. J. Jung and H. J. Kwon	Embase2005	Novel molecular targeted therapy for esophageal cancer	0	Journal of Surgical Oncology			D. S. Schrump and D. M. Nguyen	Embase2009	Synthesis and conformation-activity relationships of the peptide isosteres of FK228 and largazole	0	Journal of the American Chemical Society			"A. A. Bowers, T. J. Greshook, N. West, G. Estiu, S. L. Schreiber, O. Wiest, R. M. Williams and J. E. Bradner"	Embase2004	"Total Synthesis of Spiruchostatin A, a Potent Histone Deacetylase Inhibitor"	0	Journal of the American Chemical Society			"A. Yurek-George, F. Habens, M. Brimmell, G. Packham and A. Ganesan"	Embase2005	Epigenetic changes in prostate cancer: Implication for diagnosis and treatment	0	Journal of the National Cancer Institute			"L. C. Li, P. R. Carroll and R. Dahiya"	Embase2010	Epigenetics of human cutaneous melanoma: Setting the stage for new therapeutic strategies	0	Journal of Translational Medicine			"L. Sigalotti, A. Covre, E. Fratta, G. Parisi, F. Colizzi, A. Rizzo, R. Danielli, H. J. M. Nicolay, S. Coral and M. Maio"	Embase2007	The effect of novel anti-myeloma agents on bone metabolism of patients with multiple myeloma	0	Leukemia			"E. Terpos, M. A. Dimopoulos and O. Sezer"	Embase2007	Decitabine and its role in the treatment of hematopoietic malignancies	0	Leukemia and Lymphoma			"E. R. Plimack, H. M. Kantarjian and J. P. Issa"	Embase2008	Molecular diagnostics in chronic lymphocytic leukemia - Pathogenetic and clinical implications	0	Leukemia and Lymphoma			"T. Zenz, D. Mertens, H. Dohner and S. Stilgenbauer"	Embase2010	Incorporating novel agents in the treatment of myelodysplastic syndromes	0	Leukemia Research			"K. Anargyrou, T. P. Vassilakopoulos, M. K. Angelopoulou and E. Terpos"	Embase2004	"Targeting cancer cells - More pathways, more inhibitors, more trials"	0	MedGenMed Medscape General Medicine			S. M. Mariani	Embase2010	Romidepsin (Istodax) for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma	0	Medical Letter on Drugs and Therapeutics				Embase2004	Gateways to Clinical Trials	0	Methods and Findings in Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology			"M. Bayes, X. Rabasseda and J. R. Prous"	Embase2006	Gateways to clinical trials	0	Methods and Findings in Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology			"M. Bayes, X. Rabasseda and J. R. Prous"	Embase2007	Gateways to clinical trials	0	Methods and Findings in Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology			"M. Bayes, X. Rabasseda and J. R. Prous"	Embase2007	Gateways to clinical trials	0	Methods and Findings in Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology			"M. Bayes, X. Rabasseda and J. R. Prous"	Embase2008	Gateways to clinical trials	0	Methods and findings in experimental and clinical pharmacology			A. Tomillero and M. A. Moral	Embase2008	Gateways to clinical trials	0	Methods and Findings in Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology			A. Tomillero and M. A. Moral	Embase2009	Gateways to clinical trials	0	Methods and findings in experimental and clinical pharmacology			A. Tomillero and M. A. Moral	Embase2008	Gateways to clinical trials. July-August 2008	0	Methods and findings in experimental and clinical pharmacology			A. Tomillero and M. A. Moral	Embase2006	Gateways to Clinical Trials: April 2006	0	Methods and Findings in Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology			"M. Bayes, X. Rabasseda and J. R. Prous"	Embase2007	Gateways to clinical trials: January/February 2007	0	Methods and Findings in Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology			"M. Bayes, X. Rabasseda and J. R. Prous"	Embase2004	Gateways to clinical trials: June 2004	0	Methods and Findings in Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology			"M. Bayes, X. Rabasseda and J. R. Prous"	Embase2006	Effectiveness of Hsp90 inhibitors as anti-cancer drugs	0	Mini-Reviews in Medicinal Chemistry			"L. Xiao, X. Lu and D. M. Ruden"	Embase2011	Contribution of polymorphic transporters to oncology drug disposition and safety	0	Molecular Cancer Therapeutics			A. Sparreboom and S. D. Baker	Embase2005	Rational development of histone deacetylase inhibitors as anticancer agents: A review	0	Molecular Pharmacology			"M. R. Acharya, A. Sparreboom, J. Venitz and W. D. Figg"	Embase2008	Chromatin-remodelling mechanisms in cancer	0	Mutation Research - Reviews in Mutation Research			"L. Lafon-Hughes, M. V. Di Tomaso, L. Mendez-Acuna and W. Martinez-Lopez"	Embase2010	Epigenetic modifications as therapeutic targets	0	Nature Biotechnology			"T. K. Kelly, D. D. De Carvalho and P. A. Jones"	Embase2010	To selectivity and beyond	0	Nature Biotechnology			K. G. S. Mac	Embase2005	Combination therapy with DNA methyltransferase inhibitors in hematologic malignancies	0	Nature Clinical Practice Oncology			S. D. Gore	Embase2006	Drug Insight: Cancer therapy strategies based on restoration of endogenous cell death mechanisms	0	Nature Clinical Practice Oncology			J. C. Reed	Embase2007	Drug Insight: Role of the androgen receptor in the development and progression of prostate cancer	0	Nature Clinical Practice Oncology			M. E. Taplin	Embase2005	Inhibitors of DNA methylation: Beyond myelodysplastic syndromes	0	Nature Clinical Practice Oncology			P. Fenaux	Embase2006	"Epigenetic therapy of cancer: Past, present and future"	0	Nature Reviews Drug Discovery			C. B. Yoo and P. A. Jones	Embase2002	Histone-deacetylase inhibitors: Novel drugs for the treatment of cancer	0	Nature Reviews Drug Discovery			R. W. Johnstone	Embase2010	Microtubule-binding agents: A dynamic field of cancer therapeutics	0	Nature Reviews Drug Discovery			C. Dumontet and M. A. Jordan	Embase2011	From targets to treatments: A review of molecular targets in pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors	0	Neuroendocrinology			"B. Wiedenmann, M. Pavel and B. Kos-Kudla"	Embase2003	Epigenetic targets in hematopoietic malignancies	0	Oncogene			R. Claus and M. Lubbert	Embase2005	Target therapies for cancers of the head and neck. [French]	0	Oncologie			"A. Thiery-Vuillemin, T. Nguyen, L. Chaigneau and X. Pivot"	Embase2008	Carcinoid tumors	0	Oncologist			"S. N. Pinchot, K. Holen, R. S. Sippel and H. Chen"	Embase2001	Selected novel anticancer treatments targeting cell signaling proteins	0	Oncologist			Y. A. Elsayed and E. A. Sausville	Embase2010	Standard and emerging therapies for metastatic differentiated thyroid cancer	0	Oncologist			"C. J. O'Neill, J. Oucharek, D. Learoyd and S. B. Sidhu"	Embase2010	Primary cutaneous and systemic anaplastic large cell lymphoma	0	Oncology			"C. Querfeld, I. Khan, B. Mahon, B. P. Nelson, S. T. Rosen and A. M. Evens"	Embase2007	Epigenetic inactivation of gene expression. New therapeutic targets in hematooncology. [German]	0	Onkologe			M. Lubbert and R. Claus	Embase2010	Therapeutic options in relapsed peripheral T-cell lymphoma	0	Onkologie			G. G. Wulf	Embase2008	Medical Management of Persistent or Recurrent Differentiated Thyroid Carcinoma	0	Otolaryngologic Clinics of North America			J. Y. Jun and A. Manni	Embase2010	Prolonged QTc interval in cancer therapeutic drug development: Defining arrhythmic risk in malignancy	0	Progress in Cardiovascular Diseases			J. M. Brell	Embase2011	Drug combinations enhancing the antineoplastic effects of erlotinib in high-grade glioma	0	Recent Patents on Anti-Cancer Drug Discovery			"G. Karpel-Massler, C. R. Wirtz and M. E. Halatsch"	Embase2007	Histone deacetylase inhibitors: A new wave of molecular targeted anticancer agents	0	Recent Patents on Anti-Cancer Drug Discovery			"A. Budillon, E. Di Gennaro, F. Bruzzese, M. Rocco, G. Manzo and M. Caraglia"	Embase2011	Novel Systemic Drugs for Cutaneous T-Cell Lymphoma	0	Recent Patents on Anti-Cancer Drug Discovery			"E. Lech-Maranda, E. Robak and T. Robak"	Embase2005	Histone acetylation in reproductive organs: Significance of histone deacetylase inhibitors in gene transcription	0	Reproductive Medicine and Biology			"H. Uchida, T. Maruyama, T. Arase, M. Ono, T. Nagashima, H. Masuda, H. Asada and Y. Yoshimura"	Embase2003	Targeting Aberrant Transcriptional Repression in Acute Myeloid Leukemia	0	Reviews in Clinical and Experimental Hematology			G. H. G. Moe-Behrens and P. P. Pandolfi	Embase2008	Chromatin remodeling agents for cancer therapy	0	Reviews on Recent Clinical Trials			"D. La Sala, A. R. Magnano, M. Estenoz, R. Giordano and C. Caterina"	Embase2004	Advances in chemotherapy for chronic lymphocytic leukemia	0	Seminars in Hematology			"C. M. Wendtner, B. F. Eichhorst and M. J. Hallek"	Embase2006	New Drugs for the Treatment of Advanced-Stage Diffuse Large Cell Lymphomas	0	Seminars in Hematology			O. A. O'Connor and P. Hamlin	Embase2006	Future perspectives in the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL)	0	Seminars in Oncology			R. Dummer	Embase1998	Old and new therapies in chronic lymphocytic leukemia: Now is the time for a reassessment of therapeutic goals	0	Seminars in Oncology			"J. C. Byrd, K. R. Rai, E. A. Sausville and M. R. Grever"	Embase2009	Targeting histone deacetylases as a multifaceted approach to treat the diverse outcomes of stroke	0	Stroke			"B. Langley, C. Brochier and M. A. Rivieccio"	Embase2010	Recent advances in histone deacetylase targeted cancer therapy	0	Surgery Today			I. Hoshino and H. Matsubara	Embase2004	Redifferentiation therapy for thyroid cancer	0	Surgical Clinics of North America			J. W. Park and O. H. Clark	Embase2008	Clinical Impact of Molecular Analysis on Thyroid Cancer Management	0	Surgical Oncology Clinics of North America			V. B. Wreesmann and B. Singh	Embase2008	Castrate-resistant prostate cancer: The right targets and combinations	0	Therapy			J. Karakunnel and W. Dahut	Embase2006	Gene Therapy for Lung Cancer	0	Thoracic Surgery Clinics			E. M. Toloza	Embase2006	Novel Targeted Therapies for Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer	0	Thoracic Surgery Clinics			"P. W. Smith, C. E. Denlinger and D. R. Jones"	Embase2003	Cell-cycle dysregulation and anticancer therapy	0	Trends in Pharmacological Sciences			"Z. A. Stewart, M. D. Westfall and J. A. Pietenpol"	Embase2003	Biology and clinical application of the NIS gene	0	Tumori			"R. Elisei, A. Vivaldi and F. Pacini"	Embase2006	The application of epigenetic modifiers on the treatment of prostate and bladder cancer	0	Urologic Oncology: Seminars and Original Investigations			"Z. Zhang, J. Karam, E. Frenkel, A. Sagalowsky and J. T. Hsieh"	Embase2005	Bladder cancer clinical trials	0	Urologic Oncology: Seminars and Original Investigations			S. P. Lerner	Embase2002	Histone deacetylase inhibitor FR901228 enhances adenovirus infection of hematopoietic cells	0	Blood			"M. Kitazono, V. K. Rao, R. Robey, T. Aikou, S. Bates, T. Fojo and M. E. Goldsmith"	Embase2012	Low-dose electron beam radiation and romidepsin therapy for symptomatic cutaneous T-cell lymphoma lesions	0	British Journal of Dermatology			"O. E. Akilov, C. Grant, R. Frye, S. Bates, R. Piekarz and L. Geskin"	Embase2010	"Romidepsin acti E.vity in all three disease compartments (skin, blood, lymph nodes) in patients with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL)"	1	Journal of Clinical Oncology			"E. Kim, A. Rook, Y. Kim, M. Demierre, A. Lerner, M. Duvic, T. Robak, J. Becker, W. McCulloch and S. Whittaker"	Embase2009	Systematic assessment of potential cardiac effects of the novel histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor romidepsin	0	Journal of Clinical Oncology			"C. Cabell, S. Bates, R. Piekarz, S. Whittaker, Y. Kim, C. Godfrey, C. Schoonmaker, W. McCulloch, J. Nichols and H. A. Burris"	Embase2001	Sequential 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine-Depsipeptide FR901228 treatment induces apoptosis preferentially in cancer cells and facilitates their recognition by cytolytic T lymphocytes specific for NY-ESO-1	0	Journal of Immunotherapy			"T. S. Weiser, Z. Sheng Guo, G. A. Ohnmacht, M. L. Parkhurst, P. Tong-On, F. M. Marincola, M. R. Fischette, X. Yu, G. A. Chen, J. A. Hong, J. H. Stewart, D. M. Nguyen, S. A. Rosenberg and D. S. Schrump"	Embase2011	Low dose electron beam radiation to localized symptomatic CTCL lesions further improves clinical responses to romidepsin	0	Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology			"O. Akilov, C. Grant, L. Geskin, R. Piekarz and S. Bates"	Embase2010	Laboratory correlates for a phase II trial of romidepsin in cutaneous and peripheral T-cell lymphoma	1	British Journal of Haematology	"Romidepsin has shown promise in the treatment of T-cell lymphomas, and so we evaluated molecular endpoints gathered from 61 patients enrolled on a phase II trial of romidepsin in cutaneous and peripheral T-cell lymphoma at the National Institutes of Health. The endpoints included histone H3 acetylation and ABCB1 gene expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs); ABCB1 gene expression in tumour biopsy samples; and blood fetal haemoglobin levels (HbF), all of which were increased following romidepsin treatment. The fold increase in histone acetylation in PBMCs at 24 h was weakly to moderately well correlated with the pharmacokinetic parameters C(max) and area under the curve (AUC)(last) (rho = 0.37, P = 0.03 and rho = 0.36, P = 0.03 respectively) and inversely associated with clearance (rho = -0.44; P = 0.03). Histone acetylation in PBMCs at 24 h was associated with response (P = 0.026) as was the increase in fetal haemoglobin (P = 0.014); this latter association may be due to the longer on-study duration for patients with disease response. Together, these results suggest that pharmacokinetics may be an important determinant of response to histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDIs) - the association with histone acetylation in PBMCs at 24 h is consistent with a hypothesis that potent HDIs are needed for a critical threshold of drug exposure and durable activity."	19874311	"S. E. Bates, Z. Zhan, K. Steadman, T. Obrzut, V. Luchenko, R. Frye, R. W. Robey, M. Turner, E. R. Gardner, W. D. Figg, S. M. Steinberg, A. Ling, T. Fojo, K. W. To and R. L. Piekarz"	MEDLINE2009	Population pharmacokinetics of romidepsin in patients with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma and relapsed peripheral T-cell lymphoma	1	Clinical Cancer Research	"PURPOSE: Romidepsin is a potent histone deacetylase inhibitor under clinical development. The objective of this study was to evaluate the effect of demographic, clinical, and pharmacogenetic covariates on the pharmacokinetics of romidepsin in patients with T-cell lymphoma. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Pharmacokinetic assessment was done in 98 patients enrolled in a phase II study who received 14 or 18 mg/m2 of romidepsin as a 4-hour infusion on day 1 during their first treatment cycle. Population modeling was done using a nonlinear mixed effects modeling approach to explore the effects of polymorphic variations in CYP3A4, CYP3A5, SLCO1B3, and ABCB1, all of which encode genes thought to be involved in romidepsin disposition. RESULTS: A two-compartment model with linear kinetics adequately described the romidepsin disposition. Population clearance was 15.9 L/h with between-patient variability of 37%. ABCB1 2677G>T/A variant alleles tended toward a reduced clearance and lower volume of tissue distribution, but this was not supported by a statistical significance. Genetic variations in CYP3A4/5 and SCLO1B3 had no effect on the systemic exposure. CONCLUSION: The population pharmacokinetic analysis indicates moderate interindividual variability in romidepsin pharmacokinetics and no clinically relevant covariates associated with the unexplained pharmacokinetic variability of romidepsin in this population."	19228751	"S. Woo, E. R. Gardner, X. Chen, S. B. Ockers, C. E. Baum, T. M. Sissung, D. K. Price, R. Frye, R. L. Piekarz, S. E. Bates and W. D. Figg"	MEDLINE2010	"Phase II, two-stage, single-arm trial of the histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi) romidepsin in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC)"	1	Annals of Oncology	"BACKGROUND: Histone deacetylase blockade can promote heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) acetylation, abrogating androgen receptor signaling. A phase II trial of the histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi) romidepsin was conducted in patients with progressing, metastatic, castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). PATIENTS AND METHODS: A dose of 13 mg/m(2) was administered i.v. over 4 h on days 1, 8 and 15 every 28 days. The primary end point was rate of disease control defined as no evidence of radiological progression at 6 months. A sample size of 16 assessable patients in stage 1 and nine assessable patients in stage 2 was selected; progression to stage 2 required one or more patients with disease control in stage 1 (H(o) = 0.10, H(a) = 0.30; alpha and beta = 0.10). RESULTS: Thirty-five patients were enrolled. Two patients achieved a confirmed radiological partial response (RECIST) lasting > or = 6 months, along with a confirmed prostate-specific antigen decline of > or = 50%. Eleven patients experienced toxicity necessitating early discontinuation. The commonest adverse events were nausea (30 patients; 85.7%), fatigue (28 patients; 80.0%), vomiting (23 patients; 65.7%) and anorexia (20 patients; 57.1%). There was no significant cardiac toxicity. CONCLUSIONS: At the dose and schedule selected, romidepsin demonstrated minimal antitumor activity in chemonaive patients with CRPC. Further studies of improved HDACi, alone and in combination with other therapies, should nevertheless be investigated."	19608618	"L. R. Molife, G. Attard, P. C. Fong, V. Karavasilis, A. H. M. Reid, S. Patterson, C. E. Riggs, Jr., C. Higano, W. M. Stadler, W. McCulloch, D. Dearnaley, C. Parker and J. S. de Bono"	MEDLINE2005	A phase 1 and pharmacodynamic study of depsipeptide (FK228) in chronic lymphocytic leukemia and acute myeloid leukemia	1	Blood	"Preclinical studies with the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor depsipeptide (FK228) in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML) have demonstrated that it effectively induces apoptosis at concentrations at which HDAC inhibition occurs. We initiated a minimum effective pharmacologic dose study of depsipeptide, targeting an in vivo dose at which acetylation of histone proteins H3 and H4 increased by 100% or more in vitro. Ten patients with CLL and 10 patients with AML were treated with 13 mg/m(2) depsipeptide intravenously days 1, 8, and 15 of therapy. Neither life-threatening toxicities nor cardiac toxicities were noted, although the majority of patients experienced progressive fatigue, nausea, and other constitutional symptoms that prevented repeated dosing. Several patients had evidence of antitumor activity following treatment, but no partial or complete responses were noted by National Cancer Institute criteria. HDAC inhibition and histone acetylation increases of at least 100% were noted, as well as increases in p21 promoter H4 acetylation, p21 protein, and 1D10 antigen expression. We conclude that depsipeptide effectively inhibits HDAC in vivo in patients with CLL and AML, but its use in the current schedule of administration is limited by progressive constitutional symptoms. Future studies with depsipeptide should examine alternative administration schedules."	15466934	"J. C. Byrd, G. Marcucci, M. R. Parthun, J. J. Xiao, R. B. Klisovic, M. Moran, T. S. Lin, S. Liu, A. R. Sklenar, M. E. Davis, D. M. Lucas, B. Fischer, R. Shank, S. L. Tejaswi, P. Binkley, J. Wright, K. K. Chan and M. R. Grever"	MEDLINE2011	"A high rate of durable responses with romidepsin, bortezomib, and dexamethasone in relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma"	1	Blood	"We report results from a study exploring the combination of romidepsin, bortezomib, and dexamethasone for the treatment of patients with multiple myeloma (MM) previously treated with > 1 prior therapy. The primary objective was to determine the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) of the combination using a novel accelerated dose-escalation schedule in patients with relapsed or refractory MM. The secondary objective was to determine overall response (OR), time to progression (TTP), and overall survival (OS). The MTD identified was bortezomib 1.3 mg/m(2) (days 1, 4, 8, and 11), dexamethasone 20 mg (days 1, 2, 4, 5, 8, 9, 11, and 12), and romidepsin 10 mg/m(2) (days 1, 8, and 15) every 28 days. Thrombocytopenia (64%) was the most common >= grade 3 hematologic toxicity. Peripheral neuropathy occurred in 76% of patients (n = 19) (>= grade 3, 8%; 95% confidence interval [CI] 1%-26%). Maintenance romidepsin 10 mg/m(2) (on days 1 and 8 of a 28-day cycle) proved feasible, with 12 patients receiving a median of 7.5 cycles (range: 1-29). An OR (M-protein) of > minor response (MR) was seen in 18 of 25 patients (72%); 2 (8%) had complete remissions (CRs) and 13 (52%) had partial responses (PRs), including 7 (28%) with very good PRs (VGPRs). The median TTP was 7.2 (95% CI: 5.5-19.6) months, and the median OS was > 36 months. This regimen shows activity with manageable toxicity and warrants further evaluation. This trial was registered at www.clinicaltrials.gov as NCT00431990."	21911830	"S. J. Harrison, H. Quach, E. Link, J. F. Seymour, D. S. Ritchie, S. Ruell, J. Dean, H. Januszewicz, R. Johnstone, P. Neeson, M. Dickinson, J. Nichols and H. M. Prince"	MEDLINE2011	Phase 2 trial of romidepsin in patients with peripheral T-cell lymphoma	1	Blood	"Romidepsin (depsipeptide or FK228) is a histone deacetylase inhibitor, one of a new class of agents active in T-cell lymphoma. A phase 2 trial was conducted in cutaneous (CTCL) and peripheral (PTCL) T-cell lymphoma. Major and durable responses in CTCL supported the approval of romidepsin for CTCL. Forty-seven patients with PTCL of various subtypes including PTCL NOS, angioimmunoblastic, ALK-negative anaplastic large cell lymphoma, and enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma were enrolled. All patients had received prior therapy with a median of 3 previous treatments (range 1-11); 18 (38%) had undergone stem-cell transplant. All patients were evaluated for toxicity; 2 patients discovered to be ineligible were excluded from response assessment. Common toxicities were nausea, fatigue, and transient thrombocytopenia and granulocytopenia. Complete responses were observed in 8 and partial responses in 9 of 45 patients, for an overall response rate of 38% (95% confidence interval 24%-53%). The median duration of overall response was 8.9 months (range 2-74). Responses were observed in various subtypes, with 6 responses among the 18 patients with prior stem-cell transplant. The histone deacetylase inhibitor romidepsin has single agent clinical activity associated with durable responses in patients with relapsed PTCL."	21355097	"R. L. Piekarz, R. Frye, H. M. Prince, M. H. Kirschbaum, J. Zain, S. L. Allen, E. S. Jaffe, A. Ling, M. Turner, C. J. Peer, W. D. Figg, S. M. Steinberg, S. Smith, D. Joske, I. Lewis, L. Hutchins, M. Craig, A. T. Fojo, J. J. Wright and S. E. Bates"	MEDLINE2011	Phase 2 trial of the histone deacetylase inhibitor romidepsin for the treatment of refractory multiple myeloma	1	Cancer	"BACKGROUND: Epigenetic dysregulation is a hallmark of cancer, including multiple myeloma. Inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDACs) induce DNA hyperacetylation by inhibiting removal of acetyl groups from amino tails on histone proteins, thereby uncoiling condensed chromatin favoring transcription of silenced genes, including tumor suppressor genes. Romidepsin is an HDAC inhibitor that exhibits antiproliferative and apoptotic effects against multiple myeloma cell lines. METHODS: A phase 2 trial was performed of romidepsin in patients with multiple myeloma who were refractory to standard therapy. Treatment was comprised of romidepsin (13 mg/m2) given as a 4-hour intravenous infusion on Days 1, 8, and 15 every 28 days). Thirteen patients received a median of 2 cycles of therapy (range, 1-7 cycles). RESULTS: Although no patients had an objective response, 4 of 12 patients with secretory myeloma exhibited evidence of M-protein stabilization, and several other patients experienced improvement in bone pain and resolution of hypercalcemia. CONCLUSIONS: The results of the current study demonstrate that romidepsin, as a single agent, is unlikely to be associated with a response rate of >=30% in patients with refractory myeloma, although there was some clinical evidence suggesting a biological effect associated with therapy. Copyright Copyright 2010 American Cancer Society."	20862746	"R. Niesvizky, S. Ely, T. Mark, S. Aggarwal, J. L. Gabrilove, J. J. Wright, S. Chen-Kiang and J. A. Sparano"	MEDLINE2008	"Tolerability, pharmacodynamics, and pharmacokinetics studies of depsipeptide (romidepsin) in patients with acute myelogenous leukemia or advanced myelodysplastic syndromes"	1	Clinical Cancer Research	"PURPOSE: Epigenetic modulation of gene expression plays an important role in cancer, including leukemia. Furthermore, histone deacetylase inhibitors may induce the reexpression or repression of genes critical for normal hematopoiesis. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the toxicity, pharmacokinetic profile, and selected pharmacodynamic properties of the histone deacetylase inhibitor depsipeptide in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) or acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Depsipeptide was administered to MDS or AML patients at a (solid tumor) phase I dose of 18 mg/m(2) i.v. on days 1 and 5 every 3 weeks. Toxicities and clinical activity were monitored and pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic studies were done. RESULTS: Twelve patients (nine with AML, three with MDS) received one to five cycles of depsipeptide. The most common grade 3/4 toxicities were febrile neutropenia/infection (five patients), neutropenia/thrombocytopenia (nine patients), nausea (nine patients), and asymptomatic hypophosphatemia (three patients). No clinically significant cardiac toxicity was observed. The best response of 11 assessed patients was one complete remission in a patient with AML, stable disease in six patients, and progression of disease in four patients. Exploratory laboratory studies showed modest but rapid increases in apoptosis and changes in myeloid maturation marker expression. Histone H3 and H4 acetylation levels were evaluated in five patients; no consistent changes were observed. CONCLUSION: Depsipeptide therapy can be administered with acceptable short-term toxicity. However, gastrointestinal symptoms and fatigue seem to be treatment-limiting after multiple cycles. Depsipeptide monotherapy has limited clinical activity in unselected AML/MDS patients."	18245545	"V. M. Klimek, S. Fircanis, P. Maslak, I. Guernah, M. Baum, N. Wu, K. Panageas, J. J. Wright, P. P. Pandolfi and S. D. Nimer"	MEDLINE2008	Histone deacetylase inhibitor romidepsin has differential activity in core binding factor acute myeloid leukemia	1	Clinical Cancer Research	"PURPOSE: Recruitment of histone deacetylases (HDAC) is a mechanism of transcriptional repression implicated in the differentiation block in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). We hypothesized that the HDAC inhibitor romidepsin could cause transcriptional derepression, up-regulation of specific target genes in AML, and differentiation of the leukemic clone. The primary objectives of the study were to evaluate the safety and efficacy of romidepsin in advanced AML. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Twenty patients were stratified into cohort A or B based on the absence or presence of chromosomal abnormalities known to recruit HDACs, including those involving core binding factor (CBF). Romidepsin was administered i.v. at 13 mg/m(2)/d on days 1, 8, and 15 of a 28-day cycle. Pharmacodynamic endpoints were evaluated at serial time points. RESULTS: Common adverse effects noted were grade 1 to 2 nausea, anorexia, and fatigue. No objective evidence of antileukemic activity was seen in cohort A. In cohort B, although there were no clinical responses by standard criteria, antileukemic activity was observed in 5 of 7 patients. Two patients had clearance of bone marrow blasts and 3 patients had a >50% decrease in bone marrow blasts. Furthermore, in cohort B, at 24 h, there was a significant increase in MDR1 (P=0.005), p15 (P=0.01), and p14 (P<0.0001) expression. In cohort A, although there was a trend toward up-regulation of MDR1, p15, and p14 expression, these changes were not statistically significant. CONCLUSION: Romidepsin has differential antileukemic and molecular activity in CBF AML. Development of this agent in CBF AML should focus on combinations that target related mechanisms of gene silencing such as DNA methylation."	18981008	"O. M. Odenike, S. Alkan, D. Sher, J. E. Godwin, D. Huo, S. J. Brandt, M. Green, J. Xie, Y. Zhang, D. H. Vesole, P. Stiff, J. Wright, R. A. Larson and W. Stock"	MEDLINE2006	"Cardiac studies in patients treated with depsipeptide, FK228, in a phase II trial for T-cell lymphoma"	1	Clinical Cancer Research	"PURPOSE: The histone deacetylase inhibitor depsipeptide (FK228) has activity in patients with cutaneous or peripheral T-cell lymphoma. Electrocardiogram abnormalities, thought to be a class effect, were observed in preclinical animal studies and phase I testing and led to the incorporation of intensive cardiac monitoring in an ongoing efficacy trial. Patients and Methods: This report summarizes the cardiac monitoring of 42 patients enrolled and treated on a phase II trial with depsipeptide. Cardiac evaluations included serial electrocardiograms to evaluate T-wave, ST segment, and QT interval effects and serial serum cardiac troponin I levels and left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) evaluations to exclude myocardial damage. RESULTS: Cardiac studies from 282 cycles and 736 doses of depsipeptide included 2,051 electrocardiograms and 161 LVEF evaluations. Although T-wave flattening (grade 1) or ST segment depression (grade 2) was observed in more than half of the electrocardiograms obtained posttreatment, these electrocardiogram abnormalities were not associated with elevation of cardiac troponin I or with altered left ventricular function. No significant changes in LVEF were observed, even in 16 patients treated for >or=6 months and regardless of prior anthracycline exposure. Posttreatment electrocardiograms had a mean heart rate-corrected QT interval prolongation of 14.4 milliseconds compared with baseline. Electrolyte replacement has been instituted to mitigate potential untoward effects. CONCLUSION: The data obtained in this study show that the administration of depsipeptide is not associated with myocardial damage or impaired cardiac function. The potential effect of heart rate-corrected QT interval prolongation remains under study."	16778104	"R. L. Piekarz, A. R. Frye, J. J. Wright, S. M. Steinberg, D. J. Liewehr, D. R. Rosing, V. Sachdev, T. Fojo and S. E. Bates"	MEDLINE2002	"Phase I trial of the histone deacetylase inhibitor, depsipeptide (FR901228, NSC 630176), in patients with refractory neoplasms"	1	Clinical Cancer Research	"PURPOSE: The primary objectives of this trial were to define the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) and to characterize the toxicities and pharmacokinetics of depsipeptide (FR901228) given on a day-1 and day-5 schedule every 21 days. A secondary objective of the trial was to seek evidence of antineoplastic activity. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with advanced or refractory neoplasms received depsipeptide by a 4-h i.v. infusion on days 1 and 5 of a 21-day cycle. On the basis of preclinical data suggesting that depsipeptide may have significant cardiac toxicity, patients were treated while receiving continuous cardiac monitoring and were followed with serial cardiac enzyme determinations, electrocardiograms (ECGs), and nuclear ventriculograms (MUGA scans). The starting dose of the trial was 1 mg/m(2), and dose escalations proceeded through a total of eight dose levels to a maximum of 24.9 mg/m(2). Toxicities were graded using the National Cancer Institute common toxicity criteria, and pharmacokinetics were determined using a liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry method. RESULTS: Patients (37) received a total of 88 cycles of treatment on study (range: one to eight cycles). Dose-limiting toxicity (DLT) was observed, and the MTD exceeded at a dose of 24.9 mg/m(2). The DLTs included grade-3 fatigue (3 patients), grade-3 nausea and vomiting (1 patient), grade-4 thrombocytopenia (2 patients), and grade-4 cardiac arrhythmia (1 patient, atrial fibrillation). The MTD was defined at the seventh dose level (17.8 mg/m(2)). Reversible ST/T changes and mild reversible dysrhythmias were observed on the post-treatment ECG. There were no clinically significant changes in left ventricular ejection fraction. One patient achieved a partial response. The plasma disposition of depsipeptide was well described by a first-order, two-compartment model. The mean volume of distribution, clearance, t(1/2alpha) and t(1/2beta) at a dose of 17.8 mg/m(2) was: 8.6 liters/m(2), 11.6 liters/h/m(2), 0.42 h, and 8.1 h, respectively. The mean maximum plasma concentration at the MTD was 472.6 ng/ml (range: 249-577.8 ng/ml). Biological assays showed that the serum levels achieved could cause the characteristic cell cycle effects of this agent when serum was added to PC3 cells in culture, as well as increased histone acetylation in patient-derived peripheral blood mononuclear cells. CONCLUSION: The MTD of depsipeptide given on a day-1 and -5 schedule every 21 days is 17.8 mg/m(2). The DLTs are fatigue, nausea, vomiting, and transient thrombocytopenia and neutropenia. Whereas cardiac toxicity was anticipated based on preclinical data, there was no evidence of myocardial damage. However, reversible ECG changes with ST/T wave flattening were regularly observed. Biologically active serum concentrations were achieved, and 1 patient obtained a partial response. The recommended Phase II dose is 17.8 mg/m(2) administered on day 1 and 5 of a 21-day cycle."	11895901	"V. Sandor, S. Bakke, R. W. Robey, M. H. Kang, M. V. Blagosklonny, J. Bender, R. Brooks, R. L. Piekarz, E. Tucker, W. D. Figg, K. K. Chan, B. Goldspiel, A. T. Fojo, S. P. Balcerzak and S. E. Bates"	MEDLINE2008	Clinical and molecular responses in lung cancer patients receiving Romidepsin	1	Clinical Cancer Research	"PURPOSE: Our preclinical experiments indicated that Romidepsin (Depsipeptide FK228; DP) mediates growth arrest and apoptosis in cultured lung cancer cells. A phase II trial was done to examine clinical and molecular responses mediated by this histone deacetylase inhibitor in lung cancer patients. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Nineteen patients with neoplasms refractory to standard therapy received 4-h DP infusions (17.8 mg/m(2)) on days 1 and 7 of a 21-day cycle. Each full course of therapy consisted of two identical 21-day cycles. Plasma DP levels were evaluated by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry techniques. A variety of molecular end points were assessed in tumor biopsies via immunohistochemistry techniques. Long oligo arrays were used to examine gene expression profiles in laser-captured tumor cells before and after DP exposure, relative to lung cancer cells and adjacent normal bronchial epithelia from patients undergoing pulmonary resections. RESULTS: Nineteen patients were evaluable for toxicity assessment; 18 were evaluable for treatment response. Myelosuppression was dose limiting in one individual. No significant cardiac toxicities were observed. Maximum steady-state plasma DP concentrations ranged from 384 to 1,114 ng/mL. No objective responses were observed. Transient stabilization of disease was noted in nine patients. DP enhanced acetylation of histone H4, increased p21 expression in lung cancer cells, and seemed to shift global gene expression profiles in these cells toward those detected in normal bronchial epithelia. CONCLUSION: Although exhibiting minimal clinical efficacy at this dose and schedule, DP mediates biological effects that may warrant further evaluation of this histone deacetylase inhibitor in combination with novel-targeted agents in lung cancer patients."	18172270	"D. S. Schrump, M. R. Fischette, D. M. Nguyen, M. Zhao, X. Li, T. F. Kunst, A. Hancox, J. A. Hong, G. A. Chen, E. Kruchin, J. J. Wright, D. R. Rosing, A. Sparreboom, W. D. Figg and S. M. Steinberg"	MEDLINE2006	Cardiotoxicity of histone deacetylase inhibitor depsipeptide in patients with metastatic neuroendocrine tumors	1	Clinical Cancer Research	"PURPOSE: This phase II study was undertaken to assess objective response and toxicity of histone deacetylase inhibitor depsipeptide in patients with neuroendocrine tumors. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A total of 15 patients with metastatic neuroendocrine tumors received a 4-hour i.v. infusion of depsipeptide at 14 mg/m2 on days 1, 8, and 15 every 28 days. Tumor response was assessed at 8-week intervals using Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors. Most patients were chemo-naive (n = 12) but receiving long-acting octreotide for carcinoid syndrome (n = 11). All patients had Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 0 to 1. RESULTS: The study was terminated prematurely due to an unexpected high number of serious cardiac adverse events so the objective response rate could not be determined. A total of 77 doses of depsipeptide with a median of four doses (range, 2-13) per patient were administered. The most common adverse events included nausea (86%), anorexia (73%), vomiting (66%), and fatigue (73%). A sudden death attributed to possible fatal ventricular arrhythmia occurred within 24 hours after the fifth dose of depsipeptide. Furthermore, asymptomatic grade 2 ventricular tachycardia (n = 2) and prolonged QTc (n = 3) probably related to depsipeptide were observed. Plasma depsipeptide levels measured in a subset of patients failed to reveal differences among patients with or without cardiac adverse events. CONCLUSIONS: Depsipeptide was associated with a high number of potentially serious cardiac adverse events in patients with metastatic neuroendocrine tumor. As sudden death possibly associated with depsipeptide was observed in this trial, the risks for potentially life-threatening arrhythmia associated with this agent need to be comprehensively evaluated."	16818698	"M. H. Shah, P. Binkley, K. Chan, J. Xiao, D. Arbogast, M. Collamore, Y. Farra, D. Young and M. Grever"	MEDLINE2006	A phase II study of depsipeptide in refractory metastatic renal cell cancer	1	Clinical Genitourinary Cancer	"BACKGROUND: Therapeutic options for renal cell cancer are inadequate. Depsipeptide is a histone deacetylase inhibitor with promising preclinical and early clinical activity. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with refractory renal cell cancer with normal organ function and no history of significant cardiovascular disease were enrolled on a multi-institutional, single-arm, phase II study. Patients received depsipeptide 13 mg/m2 intravenously over 4 hours on days 1, 8, and 15 of a 28-day cycle with disease reevaluation performed every 8 weeks. One response in the initial 16 enrolled patients was required for full accrual to 25 patients, from which 5 responses needed to be observed in order to consider the agent appropriate for further study. Toxicity was assessed using National Cancer Institute Common Toxicity Criteria, version 2.0. RESULTS: The 29 evaluable patients, who were accrued so that 25 patients who received >or= 3 doses of depsipeptide could be observed, were heavily pretreated with a median of 2 previous systemic therapies and a 2-year median duration of metastatic disease. Twenty-four had clear-cell histology. The most common serious toxicities were fatigue, nausea, vomiting, and anemia. Two patients developed a prolonged QTc interval, one patient each developed grade 3 atrial fibrillation and tachycardia, and there was 1 sudden death. Two patients experienced an objective response (1 complete response) for an overall response rate of 7% (95% CI, 0.8%-23%). CONCLUSION: Depsipeptide at this dose and schedule does not have sufficient activity for further investigation in this patient population."	16859580	"W. M. Stadler, K. Margolin, S. Ferber, W. McCulloch and J. A. Thompson"	MEDLINE2009	Phase II trial of romidepsin (NSC-630176) in previously treated colorectal cancer patients with advanced disease: a Southwest Oncology Group study (S0336)	1	Investigational New Drugs	"INTRODUCTION: Patients with metastatic colorectal cancer who progress on standard chemotherapy have limited treatment options. New and effective drugs are needed for these patients. Romidepsin is a histone deacetylase inhibitor that can alter chromatin structure and gene transcription leading to multiple changes in cellular protein production. This may result in cell cycle arrest and tumor growth inhibition. Romidepsin has shown anti-proliferative activity in vitro against multiple mouse and human tumor cell lines and in vivo in human tumor xenograft models. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients were required to have pathologically verified, measurable, metastatic or locally advanced colorectal cancer that was surgically unresectable. They must have failed either one or two prior chemotherapy regimens, had performance status of 0-1, adequate bone marrow, renal and hepatic function, and no significant cardiac disease. Patients were treated with romidepsin at a dose of 13 mg/m(2) as a 4-h iv infusion on days 1, 8, and 15 of a 28-day cycle. The study had a two stage design. The primary objective of the study was to determine the confirmed response probability in this group of patients treated with romidepsin. RESULTS: Twenty-eight patients were registered to the study, two of whom were ineligible. One eligible patient refused all treatment and was not analyzed. For the 25 remaining patients, performance status was 0 in 16 patients and 1 in nine patients. Ten patients had received one prior chemotherapy regimen and fifteen 2 prior regimens. Out of the 25 eligible and analyzable patients accrued in the first stage of the protocol, no objective responses were observed and the study was permanently closed. Four patients had stable disease as the best response. Twenty-five patients were assessed for toxicity. No grade 4 or greater toxicities were seen. Fourteen of the 25 patients experienced grade 3 toxicities the most common of which were fatigue or anorexia. CONCLUSION: Romidepsin at this dose and schedule is ineffective in the treatment of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer after prior chemotherapy. Future trials might evaluate combinations of romidepsin with chemotherapeutic or other agents."	18941712	"R. P. Whitehead, C. Rankin, P. M. G. Hoff, P. J. Gold, K. G. Billingsley, R. A. Chapman, L. Wong, J. H. Ward, J. L. Abbruzzese and C. D. Blanke"	MEDLINE2006	Phase I study of depsipeptide in pediatric patients with refractory solid tumors: a Children's Oncology Group report	1	Journal of Clinical Oncology	"PURPOSE: To determine the maximum-tolerated dose (MTD), dose-limiting toxicities (DLT), pharmacokinetic profile, and pharmacodynamics of the histone deacetylase inhibitor, depsipeptide, in children with refractory or recurrent solid tumors. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Depsipeptide was administered as a 4-hour infusion weekly for 3 consecutive weeks every 28 days at dose levels of 10 mg/m2, 13 mg/m2, 17 mg/m2, and 22 mg/m2. Pharmacokinetics and histone acetylation studies were performed in the first course. The levels of H3 histone and acetyl-H3 histone were evaluated in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) using immunofluorescence techniques. RESULTS: There were 24 patients, and 18 who were assessable were enrolled. DLTs included reversible, asymptomatic T-wave inversions, without any associated changes in troponin levels or evidence of ventricular dysfunction, in the inferior leads in two patients at 22 mg/m2 and in the lateral leads in one patient at 13 mg/m2 (n = 1), and transient asymptomatic sick sinus syndrome and hypocalcemia in one patient at 17 mg/m2. At the MTD (17 mg/m2), the median depsipeptide clearance was 6.8 L/h/m(2) with an area under the plasma depsipeptide concentration-time curve from 0 to infinity of 2,414 ng/mL/h, similar to adults. Accumulation of acetylated H3 histones was seen in all patients in a dose independent manner, with maximal accumulation at a median of 4 hours, (range, 0 hours to 20 hours) after the end of the infusion. No objective tumor responses were observed. CONCLUSION: Depsipeptide is well tolerated in children with recurrent or refractory solid tumors when administered weekly for 3 consecutive weeks every 28 days and inhibits histone deacetylase activity in PBMC in a dose-independent manner. The recommended phase II dose in children with solid tumors is 17 mg/m2."	16877737	"G. Children's Oncology, M. Fouladi, W. L. Furman, T. Chin, B. B. Freeman, 3rd, L. Dudkin, C. F. Stewart, M. D. Krailo, R. Speights, A. M. Ingle, P. J. Houghton, J. Wright, P. C. Adamson and S. M. Blaney"	MEDLINE2012	"Results from a pivotal, open-label, phase II study of romidepsin in relapsed or refractory peripheral T-cell lymphoma after prior systemic therapy"	1	Journal of Clinical Oncology	"PURPOSE: Romidepsin is a structurally unique, potent class 1 selective histone deacetylase inhibitor. The primary objective of this international, pivotal, single-arm, phase II trial was to confirm the efficacy of romidepsin in patients with relapsed or refractory peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL). PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients who were refractory to at least one prior systemic therapy or for whom at least one prior systemic therapy failed received romidepsin at 14 mg/m(2) as a 4-hour intravenous infusion on days 1, 8, and 15 every 28 days. The primary end point was the rate of complete response/unconfirmed complete response (CR/CRu) as assessed by an independent review committee. RESULTS: Of the 131 patients enrolled, 130 had histologically confirmed PTCL by central review. The median number of prior systemic therapies was two (range, one to eight). The objective response rate was 25% (33 of 130), including 15% (19 of 130) with CR/CRu. Patient characteristics, prior stem-cell transplantation, number or type of prior therapies, or response to last prior therapy did not have an impact on response rate. The median duration of response was 17 months, with the longest response ongoing at 34+ months. Of the 19 patients who achieved CR/CRu, 17 (89%) had not experienced disease progression at a median follow-up of 13.4 months. The most common grade >= 3 adverse events were thrombocytopenia (24%), neutropenia (20%), and infections (all types, 19%). CONCLUSION: Single-agent romidepsin induced complete and durable responses with manageable toxicity in patients with relapsed or refractory PTCL across all major PTCL subtypes, regardless of the number or type of prior therapies. Results led to US Food and Drug Administration approval of romidepsin in this indication."	22271479	"B. Coiffier, B. Pro, H. M. Prince, F. Foss, L. Sokol, M. Greenwood, D. Caballero, P. Borchmann, F. Morschhauser, M. Wilhelm, L. Pinter-Brown, S. Padmanabhan, A. Shustov, J. Nichols, S. Carroll, J. Balser, B. Balser and S. Horwitz"	MEDLINE2009	Phase II multi-institutional trial of the histone deacetylase inhibitor romidepsin as monotherapy for patients with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma	1	Journal of Clinical Oncology	"PURPOSE Romidepsin (depsipeptide or FK228) is a member of a new class of antineoplastic agents active in T-cell lymphoma, the histone deacetylase inhibitors. On the basis of observed responses in a phase I trial, a phase II trial of romidepsin in patients with T-cell lymphoma was initiated. PATIENTS AND METHODS The initial cohort was limited to patients with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL), or subtypes mycosis fungoides or Sezary syndrome, who had received no more than two prior cytotoxic regimens. There were no limits on other types of therapy. Subsequently, the protocol was expanded to enroll patients who had received more than two prior cytotoxic regimens. Results Twenty-seven patients were enrolled onto the first cohort, and a total of 71 patients are included in this analysis. These patients had undergone a median of four prior treatments, and 62 patients (87%) had advanced-stage disease (stage IIB, n = 15; stage III, n= 6; or stage IV, n = 41). Toxicities included nausea, vomiting, fatigue, and transient thrombocytopenia and granulocytopenia. Pharmacokinetics were evaluated with the first administration of romidepsin. Complete responses were observed in four patients, and partial responses were observed in 20 patients for an overall response rate of 34% (95% CI, 23% to 46%). The median duration of response was 13.7 months. CONCLUSION The histone deacetylase inhibitor romidepsin has single-agent clinical activity with significant and durable responses in patients with CTCL."	19826128	"R. L. Piekarz, R. Frye, M. Turner, J. J. Wright, S. L. Allen, M. H. Kirschbaum, J. Zain, H. M. Prince, J. P. Leonard, L. J. Geskin, C. Reeder, D. Joske, W. D. Figg, E. R. Gardner, S. M. Steinberg, E. S. Jaffe, M. Stetler-Stevenson, S. Lade, A. T. Fojo and S. E. Bates"	MEDLINE2010	"Final results from a multicenter, international, pivotal study of romidepsin in refractory cutaneous T-cell lymphoma"	1	Journal of Clinical Oncology	"PURPOSE: The primary objective of this study was to confirm the efficacy of romidepsin in patients with treatment refractory cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL). PATIENTS AND METHODS: This international, pivotal, single-arm, open-label, phase II study was conducted in patients with stage IB to IVA CTCL who had received one or more prior systemic therapies. Patients received romidepsin as an intravenous infusion at a dose of 14 mg/m(2) on days 1, 8, and 15 every 28 days. Response was determined by a composite assessment of total tumor burden including cutaneous disease, lymph node involvement, and blood (Sezary cells). RESULTS: Ninety-six patients were enrolled and received one or more doses of romidepsin. Most patients (71%) had advanced stage disease (>= IIB). The response rate was 34% (primary end point), including six patients with complete response (CR). Twenty-six of 68 patients (38%) with advanced disease achieved a response, including five CRs. The median time to response was 2 months, and the median duration of response was 15 months. A clinically meaningful improvement in pruritus was observed in 28 (43%) of 65 patients, including patients who did not achieve an objective response. Median duration of reduction in pruritus was 6 months. Drug-related adverse events were generally mild and consisted mainly of GI disturbances and asthenic conditions. Nonspecific, reversible ECG changes were noted in some patients. CONCLUSION: Romidepsin has significant and sustainable single-agent activity (including improvement in pruritus) and an acceptable safety profile, making it an important therapeutic option for treatment refractory CTCL."	20697094	"S. J. Whittaker, M.-F. Demierre, E. J. Kim, A. H. Rook, A. Lerner, M. Duvic, J. Scarisbrick, S. Reddy, T. Robak, J. C. Becker, A. Samtsov, W. McCulloch and Y. H. Kim"	MEDLINE2002	A phase I trial of depsipeptide (FR901228) in patients with advanced cancer	1	Journal of Experimental Therapeutics & Oncology	"Depsipeptide (FR901228) is a bicyclic peptide isolated from Chromobacterium violaceum that has demonstrated potent in vitro cytotoxic activity against human tumor cell lines and in vivo efficacy against human tumor xenografts. The primary mechanism of action is through inhibition of histone deacetylase. Initial development was halted due to significant cardiac toxicity. Subsequent studies performed at the National Cancer Institute demonstrated administration without cardiotoxicity was possible by varying the schedule of administration. A phase I trial was designed to determine the maximum tolerated dose and toxicity profile when administered as a 4-hour infusion weekly x 3 with one week rest. 33 Patients with advanced, incurable cancers were enrolled into this trial and treated with doses of Depsipeptide ranging from 1 mg/m2 to 17.7 mg/m2. At doses above 5 mg/m2, we observed common symptoms of nausea, vomiting, fatigue, and anorexia. Subtle changes in ECGs were seen in several patients. However, no cardiac enzyme abnormalities or reduction in ejection fraction were observed. The MTD was defined as 13.3 mg/m2 with dose limiting toxicities being grade 3 thrombocytopenia and fatigue. Depsipeptide can be safely administered when given as a 4-hour infusion and further clinical trials are warranted."	12440223	"J. L. Marshall, N. Rizvi, J. Kauh, W. Dahut, M. Figuera, M. H. Kang, W. D. Figg, I. Wainer, C. Chaissang, M. Z. Li and M. J. Hawkins"	MEDLINE2010	Phase II study of the histone deacetylase inhibitor Romidepsin in relapsed small cell lung cancer (Cancer and Leukemia Group B 30304)	1	Journal of Thoracic Oncology: Official Publication of the International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer	"INTRODUCTION: Treatment of small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is initially gratifying with most patients responding to platinum-based chemotherapy. Treatment of relapsed disease gives much lower response rates of short duration. We undertook this study of the protein deacetylase inhibitor Romidepsin in chemosensitive recurrent SCLC based on preclinical data that suggested this to be an active target. METHODS: Patients had recurrent chemosensitive SCLC (relapse >=90 days since completion of platinum-based chemotherapy). Treatment was administered as weekly infusions of Romidepsin at 13 mg/m(2) for 3 of 4 weeks. We designed a two-stage phase II study targeting a response rate of 30% (<10% response would be uninteresting and >=30% worthy of further study). RESULTS: Sixteen patients (10 male, 6 female) were accrued to the first stage of this study. Most (11 patients, 69%) presented with extensive-stage SCLC, and all had received prior chemotherapy, with 11 having received prior radiation. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status was excellent with 0 in 6 patients (38%) and 1 in 10 patients. No objective responses were seen, and stable disease was the best response seen in 3 patients (19%). Toxicity was modest with 3 patients suffering grade 3 toxicity (lymphopenia, insomnia, nausea, vomiting, and hyponatremia) and one patient with grade 4 thrombocytopenia. Median progression-free survival was 1.8 months, and median overall survival was 6 months. CONCLUSION: Romidepsin given on a weekly schedule in patients with chemosensitive, recurrent SCLC was inactive and will not be pursued further in this setting."	20871263	"G. A. Otterson, L. Hodgson, H. Pang, E. E. Vokes, Cancer and B. Leukemia Group"	MEDLINE2011	A phase I/II trial of the histone deacetylase inhibitor romidepsin for adults with recurrent malignant glioma: North American Brain Tumor Consortium Study 03-03	1	Neuro-Oncology	"Romidepsin, a potent histone deacetylase inhibitor, has shown activity in preclinical glioma models. The primary objectives of this trial were to determine the pharmacokinetics of romidepsin in patients with recurrent glioma on enzyme-inducing antiepileptic drugs (EIAEDs) and to evaluate the antitumor efficacy of romidepsin in patients with recurrent glioblastoma who were not receiving EIAEDs. Two dose cohorts were studied in the phase I component of the trial (13.3 and 17.7 mg/m(2)/d). Patients in the phase II component were treated with intravenous romidepsin at a dosage of 13.3 mg/m(2)/day on days 1, 8, and 15 of each 28-day cycle. Eight patients were treated on the phase I component. A similar romidepsin pharmacokinetic profile was demonstrated between patients receiving EIAEDs to those not receving EIAEDs. Thirty-five patients with glioblastoma were accrued to the phase II component. There was no objective radiographic response. The median progression-free survival (PFS) was 8 weeks and only 1 patient had a PFS time >=6 months (PFS6 = 3%). To date, 34 patients (97%) have died, with a median survival duration of 34 weeks. Despite in vitro studies showing that romidepsin is primarily metabolized by CYP3A4, no decrease in exposure to romidepsin was seen in patients receiving potent CYP3A4 inducers. Romidepsin, at its standard dose and schedule, was ineffective for patients with recurrent glioblastomas. ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT00085540."	21377994	"F. M. Iwamoto, K. R. Lamborn, J. G. Kuhn, P. Y. Wen, W. K. A. Yung, M. R. Gilbert, S. M. Chang, F. S. Lieberman, M. D. Prados and H. A. Fine"	MEDLINE2009	Clinically significant responses achieved with romidepsin in 37 patient with cutaneous t-cell lymphoma (CTCL) with blood involvement	1	Blood			"Y. H. Kim, M. F. Demierre, E. J. Kim, A. H. Rook, A. Lerner, M. Duvic, S. Reddy, T. Robak, J. C. Becker, A. Samtsov, W. McCulloch and S. Whittaker"	Embase2010	"Final results from a pivotal, multicenter, international, open-label, phase 2 study of romidepsin in progressive or relapsed peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL) following prior systemic therapy"	1	Blood			"B. Coiffier, B. Pro, H. M. Prince, F. M. Foss, L. Sokol, M. Greenwood, D. Caballero, P. Borchmann, F. Morschhauser, M. Wilhelm, L. Pinter-Brown, S. Padmanabhan, A. Shustov, J. Nichols, S. Carroll, J. Balser and S. M. Horwitz"	Embase2009	Final results of a phase 2 NCI multicenter study of romidepsin in patients with relapsed peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL)	1	Blood			"R. Piekarz, J. Wright, R. Frye, S. L. Allen, D. Joske, M. Kirschbaum, I. D. Lewis, M. Prince, S. Smith, E. S. Jaffe and S. Bates"	Embase2012	Phase 1 results from a study of romidepsin in combination with gemcitabine in patients with advanced solid tumors	1	Cancer Investigation			"S. F. Jones, J. R. Infante, D. R. Spigel, N. W. Peacock, D. S. Thompson, F. A. Greco, W. McCulloch and I. H. A. Burris Iii"	Embase2002	Phase I study of sequential deoxyazacytidine/depsipeptide infusion in patients with malignancies involving lungs or pleura	1	Clinical Lung Cancer			"D. S. Schrump, D. M. Nguyen, T. F. Kunst, A. Hancox, W. D. Figg, S. M. Steinberg, V. Pishchik and Y. Becerra"	Embase2011	Complete responses (CR/CRu) on a phase II study of romidepsin in relapsed or refractory peripheral T-cell lymphoma (R/R PTCL)	1	Journal of Clinical Oncology			"S. M. Horwitz, B. Coiffier, F. M. Foss, H. M. Prince, L. Sokol, M. Greenwood, D. Caballero, P. Borchmann, F. Morschhauser, M. Wilhelm, L. C. Pinter-Brown, S. Padmanabhan, A. R. Shustov, J. Nichols, J. Balser, S. Carroll and B. Pro"	Embase2010	Phase II trial of histone deacetylase inhibitor romidepsin for adults with recurrent high-grade gliomas (North American Brain Tumor Consortium study 03-03)	1	Neuro-Oncology			"F. Iwamoto, K. Lamborn, J. Kuhn, P. Wen, W. K. A. Yung, M. Gilbert, S. Chang, F. Lieberman, M. Prados and H. Fine"	Embase